BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA
CAPS United captain Phineas Bhamusi believes the Harare derby against archrivals Dynamos on Sunday offers them a chance to redeem themselves and retrieve a campaign that has looked all but lost in recent times. Yet only a month ago, they were tipped among contenders for the ultimate prize in domestic football after a good start to the title race. Now they have gone on a dreadful run of poor results during which they have lost five matches on the trot, their worst performance since 2012 when they suffered seven straight defeats. And with the latest dismal run, it will not be unfair to suggest that Caps United’s season has unravelled. Their pursuit of the title has become more complicated than ever. But Bhamusi, one of the more experienced members of the squad and a veteran of several derby battles, says they were seeing light where others are seeing gloom. The winger said there was inherent motivation among his troops whenever they play their city rivals. “The match is important to everyone associated with the club, we know how sweet a victory on Sunday will be. We haven’t won in five matches, but we are giving ourselves a big chance on Sunday. We can’t just continue dropping points and as a team, we are going all out for a win on Sunday,” he said. The Green Machine go into the match on the back of a depressing run that has seen them score 17 goals and concede 22 in 16 matches. Dynamos coach Tonderai Ndiraya is refusing to underestimate the Green Machine. “You cannot underrate Caps, especially getting into the derby. They always harness all their energy, all effort to make sure they get the result despite all that is happening in their camp. Rest assured you will see a different Caps next weekend. Rest assured that the match will be exciting. Hopefully, we will turn up in that game, so we have a whole week to prepare for that and hopefully we can push and get a result,” Ndiraya said after his team’s insipid display in a 0-0 draw against Herentals. Caps United have been boosted by the return of defender Valentine Musarurwa, who missed the trip to Bulawayo last week due to illness. Caps went on to lose 2-0 to Bulawayo Chiefs. Musarurwa also missed the match against Chicken Inn which the Harare giants lost 1-0 at the National Sports Stadium as he was serving a suspension after accumulating three yellow cards. He had hoped to play a part in the match against Bulawayo Chiefs on Sunday, but fell ill. He returns at the right time as Caps seek to reassert themselves. On the other hand, Dynamos have also failed to win in their last four matches and did not score in the last two matches. Their situation has not been helped by the turbulence that rocked the team last week, which saw Ndiraya being suspended in unclear circumstances, only to be reinstated on Thursday ahead of the match against Herentals. They struggled for fluency and were inevitably held to a 0-0 draw and Ndiraya is hoping his charges will do wonders during the derby. Meanwhile, the Premier Soccer League will take a two-week break after match-day 17 this weekend and will resume on June 25.