Shakira and her partner Gerard Piqué have announced their separation. The Colombian singer, 45, confirmed that she is no longer with her footballer beau, 35, following an 11 year relationship and two children together. Shakira’s statement read: ‘We regret to confirm that we are parting ways. For the well-being of our children, who are our highest priority, we ask that you respect their privacy.  Thank you for your understanding.’ Shakira hinted at disharmony between the pair in her latest hit Te Felicito with Rauw Alejandro, in which she sings: ‘To complete you I broke into pieces; I was warned, but I didn’t listen; I realised that yours is false… ‘It was the drop that overflowed the glass; Don’t tell me you’re sorry, that sounds sincere, but I know you well and I know you’re lying.’ The couple had been together since 2011, with the pair having met while filming the music video for her World Cup song Waka Waka the previous year. While they never married, Sharika and Gerard did welcome two sons, Milan, nine, and Sasha, seven, during their relationship. Speaking to Gary Neville on a recent episode of The Overlap, the Spain international explained that he hadn’t proposed because their relationship ‘works fine as it is.’ ‘I like it how we are right now. We have two kids, nine and seven, we work good as a couple. We don’t have the need to be married, it’s fine,’ said Pique, who will start his 15th consecutive season with Barcelona in August. After Gerard made his 600th appearance for Barcelona in March, Shakira marked the landmark with a heartfelt post on social media. The Barcelona FC defender risked the wrath of Shakira by claiming that playing against Espanyol was better than sex. He said in an interview with YouTuber Jordi Wild: ‘I’m happy that Espanyol has been promoted to the first division because that’s how we play in their stadium. ‘I like to go there, I get whistled at all the time. You laugh and the fans get even madder. ‘There is nothing comparable in the world. I would say it’s better than sex. I enjoy it a lot more than playing against Real Madrid.’ -DailyMail