By MAGRETH RUZVIDZO
GEMS star Felistus Kwangwa believes she did enough for Surrey Storm in the just-ended Vitality Netball Super League season to earn herself a contract extension with the English side. The goal defender helped the side to a seventh finish, which was an improvement from last year when they finished 10th on the log standings. This was her second season with the club after she was re-signed last year. And with her contract coming to an end, she is hoping that the deal could be extended again. “I’m quite happy with my performance this season and I think if you look at my statistics, they are quite better than last season. I got more game time compared to last season,” Kwangwa said. “Given that I came in late, I played much better and I managed to adjust and fit in well. It didn’t take me long as happened last season probably because I’m used to the environment now, so it was easy for me to adjust to everything.” The 27-year-old Gems skipper had a season to remember for her club, where she was a regular, and winning a player of the match award once. While they improved their rankings from last season, Kwangwa believes her team could have done better. “We had the chance to be in the top four, but we made those basic errors in some crucial games which were meant to take us to the top. But that’s part of the sport and it’s a learning curve for us. Probably next season we’ll do better on that one,” she said. “I still remember last season we said (as team) that we’ll focus on rebuilding the team and I think it really worked, but we just have to be mentally tough if we want to finish in the top four or be the champions because everything is possible.” But for now, Kwangwa will need to focus on the Gems’ preparations for the World Cup qualifiers in August. The team will tour the United Kingdom as part of its preparations, where it is set to play some international teams. “As of now, I don’t know (about my future plans), but if I’m to be given an offer to be with Storm, I would grab it with two hands, and if not, I just pray that there would be another team,” Kwangwa said. “If not, I would be playing home for Correctional Queens and preparing  for the World Cup because I’m so confident that in August, we are going to qualify for the World Cup.”