BY FORTUNE MBELE HIGHLANDERS………………(0)1 HARARE CITY……………………0 HIGHLANDERS goalkeeper Ariel Sibanda converted a second half penalty to give his side a win against Harare City in a Castle Lager Premier League match at Barbourfields Stadium yesterday. With the game seemingly heading for a draw, substitute Washington Navaya was hacked down inside the penalty box to win his side a spot kick which Sibanda converted. This was Joel Luphahla’s last game in charge as new coach altemar Brito watched from the terraces ahead of his take over this week. Luphahla gave Mthabisi Ncube the nod and he didn’t disappoint. “Credit to the players. They played well under the circumstances. I am happy we started with the boys from Bosso 90. We had lots of injuries and illnesses that we are worried about,” Luphahla said. His counterpart, Taurai Mangwiro gave credit to Sibanda for saving the day for Bosso as Harare City troubled the Bulawayo giants, especially in the first half Highlanders started well with a high pressing game, but Harare City settled in well 10 minutes into the game and in the 12th minute Emmanuel Mandiranga curler from outside the penalty box was punched away for a corner-kick by Bosso goalkeeper Sibanda. Ngodzo’s weak shot three minutes later from a move started by Godfrey Makaruse did not trouble Harare City goalkeeper Kelvin Shangiwa. Makaruse was at it again in the 17th minute, but was kept out by Shangiwa. Sibanda was kept on his toes as he made another save in the 26th minute from a Donald Mudadi effort from outside the box. On the half hour mark, it was Highlanders with a Darlington Munkuli header which was cleared off the goal line by Mudadi. On the 38th minute, Mandiranga packed another shot which was punched away from a corner-kick by the ever busy Sibanda, who made another spectacular save from the resultant set-piece. Ngodzo was denied by Shangiwa once again from a free-kick in the 40th minute as action swung from one end to the other. The new Portuguese gaffer starts his tenure from today, and is walking into a happier dressing room after the gloom of Mandla Mpofu’s tenure. Teams Highlanders: A Sibanda, R Kutsanzira, M Ndlovu, A Mbeba, P Muduhwa, N Masuku, G Makaruse, D Munkuli, S Ngala (L Chikuhwa 70′), J Ngodzo, M Ncube (W Navaya 61′) Harare City: K Shangiwa, H Chapusha, D Dzvinyai, N Bizeki, T Pio, D Mudadi, S Masunda, E Ziocha, W Muvirimi (C Rupiya 75′), C Mujuru, E Mandiranga