The Queen reportedly banned Harry and Meghan from having a photographer present when she met great-granddaughter Lilibet for the first time. Lilibet, who celebrated her first birthday on Saturday, was introduced to the Queen for the first time last Thursday, according to The Sun. Harry and Meghan named their daughter after her great-grandmother’s childhood nickname. The Sussexes were apparently keen to bring a photographer to the pair’s first face-to-face meeting at Windsor Castle but the request was refused. Harry, 37, and Meghan, 40, returned to California on Sunday without a snap, with members of the royal family reportedly concerned that pictures of the Queen and Lilibet taken by the couple’s photographer could be shared by them with US television networks. An insider told The Sun : “Harry and Meghan wanted their photographer to capture the moment Lilibet met the Queen. “But they were told no chance. It was a private family meeting.” The Sussexes were noticeably absent from the limelight during the Platinum Jubilee celebrations and were spotted sitting several rows behind Prince Charles and Prince William during Friday’s Service of Thanksgiving at St Paul’s cathedral. They were kept at arm’s length by the royals during the celebrations and left without any public appearances alongside the Queen, Charles, Camilla, William or Kate. Harry and Meghan’s low profile over the weekend meant they attended without Netflix cameras in attendance. The couple reportedly left the UK prior to the conclusion of the final events marking the Queen’s 70 years on the throne. As the £15 million Platinum Jubilee Pageant finale got under way outside Buckingham Palace on Sunday, the Sussexes had already driven away from Frogmore Cottage. The couple’s swift exit before the end of the Jubilee celebrations came as experts claimed Harry was struggling to accept his new “second row royal” role, and fans pointed out Meghan’s “obvious” snub of Kate Middleton. Tensions have been running high between the Sussexes and the rest of the royal family since the pair’s Oprah interview last year, in which they made allegations of racism and Meghan spoke openly about her fractured relationship with Kate. This weekend marked Harry and Meghan’s first public appearance alongside the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge since moving to the US two years ago. – Mirror