BY TERRY MADYAUTA WHAWHA………………………………….(1)1 NGEZI PLATINUM STARS……………… 0 VETERAN forward Tineyi Chitora was the toast of the day after scoring the all-important goal that helped WhaWha beat a lethargic Ngezi Platinum Stars in a Castle Lager Premier Soccer League match at Ascot Stadium yesterday. The prison wardens have been undoubtedly one of the weakest teams in the topflight campaign, but they seem to have mastered the art of slaying giants. Ngezi became the latest big team to succumb to WhaWha at Ascot Stadium after Chicken Inn who were thumped 3-0 by the wardens. In this one, the prison wardens were off the mark on the fifth minute through Chitora who headed the ball home from a seemingly harmless cross that was delivered into the box by Tendaishe Magwaza. Ngezi, responded and came close to an equaliser after 18 minutes when Wayne Makuva hit the upright with a powerful left footer. Striker Delic Murimba then missed the target from the rebound. Five minutes later English Brown almost doubled scores for the prison wardens after getting to the end of a long Jayden Barake cross, but Ngezi goal-minder Nelson Chadya denied the Legends Academy product from close range. Play slowed down noticeably afterwards. It did not improve in the second half, and rookie WhaWha goal-minder, Allan Masaya (20), on his maiden appearance in the top-flight was a spectator. Delic Murimba and Denver Mukamba were pale shadows of themselves for the better part of the encounter. WhaWha coach Luke Petros was elated. “It is impressive that we are managing to win against these big teams. We managed to hold them in this one and I hope we will do the same when we play the second leg,” he said. “The boys are not giving up whatsoever, in fact they have maintained the fighting spirit within them. That has been our main strength, that zeal to be better is pushing.” Despite the win, the Gweru-based side remain at the basement of the Premier League standings, though they are now tied on 12 points together with Bulawayo City who are 17th. Ngezi coach Benjani Mwaruwari decried injuries that have piled up in his team. “We have injuries and that affected us. We conceded the goal and failed to recover even though we played good football,” he said. “Playing good football and failing to score amounts to nothing. I have always said we have to score goals if we are to be successful at this level. “Injuries made it difficult for us today, but we move on with hope of getting better results and that we will come back stronger after the break.” Teams WhaWha: Masaya A, Magwaza T, Daka T, Useni R, Gadzani J, M Chirwa, Horonga R, Calum E (D Mapuwa 70′), E Mawanda, T Chitora (Ganje S 57′), Barake J (A Matewu 90′) Ngezi Platinum Stars: N Chadya, C Mavhurume, P Moyo, Makopa A, Chivandire A, Sibanda T, Mukumba M (V Kadonzvo 86), Makuva W (T Murasiramwa 68′), Amini Q, Mukamba D, Murimba D