BY FORTUNE MBELE
BULAWAYO City will go shopping in the lower divisions in the upcoming transfer window in a bid to retain their Premier Soccer League status going into the second half of the season. The league is on a two-week break and resumes on June 25. Coach Farai Tawachera believes players from Division One can keep the team afloat. Tawachera took over from Philani “Beefy” Ncube early last month after Bulawayo City had suffered five successive defeats in the league and the last straw for the latter was when he lost to city neighbours Bulawayo Chiefs. In came Tawachera to face log-leaders Dynamos in the first assignment and Bulawayo City held the Glamour Boys to a 1-1 draw at the National Sports Stadium and they have not lost a game since. The transfer window opens on July 1, a week after the league resumes. “We would have loved to get experienced players, but that is not going to happen because of the financial situation at the club. We are going to look for players in Division One. Hopefully we can get players there who can help us fight relegation. We cannot compete in the market. We are going into the difficult phase of the season. If we don’t lose any players I am sure we are going to survive,” Tawachera said. After losing to Chiefs at Barbourfields Stadium in April, Bulawayo City drew against Dynamos, hammered visiting ZPC Kariba 3-0 before playing two goalless draws against Harare City away and Black Rhinos to bring the curtain down on the first half of the season. “I was at Bulawayo City before in 2020 and I was part of the technical team that recruited these boys. I know these boys very well and we just told them to believe in themselves. We told them we would get that trigger point and we got it from Dynamos,” Tawachera said. But still, Bulawayo City have not extricated themselves from the jaws of relegation as they hang precariously on the 17th spot on the log-standings, with just 12 points from 17 games, having won only two matches with six draws and nine defeats. Some of the key players at Bulawayo City include veteran Welcome Ndiweni, Lewis Sibanda, Chrispen Machisi, Vincent Moyo and goalkeeper Reward Muza and striker Rodi Sibanda on loan from Highlanders.