BY TENDAI SAUTA
ABSTRACT visual art communicator, Richard, aka Mushroom, Mupumha has challenged fellow artists to broaden their artistry through linking with other arts disciplines such as fashion, music and film in order to remain relevant while acquiring better skills to attract bigger markets. The Chitungwiza Arts Centre-based award-winning and globally-celebrated stone carver and folk guitarist said: “I sailed through the COVID-19 lockdown by blending and interchanging musical skills, tailoring and stone carving depending on which one would bring food on the table. “I am a guitarist, I play and compose gospel songs for guitar. During the lockdown I promoted my songs Imikaimi mukwane, Pasipano idandaro and imheni here? I went to Germany nine times as a visual artist teaching in schools or individuals. I became better known through my guitar which I would strum perfectly all the time.” Mupumha is famed for challenging social ills through his carving such as Kakara Kununa Hudya Kamwe, Shona for amassing wealth by exploiting others, Sekuru Kaguvi, Kissing Lovers and Kurova Ngoma, among others. “lf one wants to go abroad to market themselves as an artist they should have full details and knowledge about their art and skills. Take time to master your art and be creative on anything that you come across and you should be able to teach art in a friendly manner,”he said.  Mushroom urged artists to be true to themselves and broaden their artistry into other fields. “Art is not about stone carving only. Build strong skills on all aspects of Zimbabwean culture such as clothing, beauty, housing, education, dance and music. The coronavirus or COVID-19 killed my work. Buyers are not coming in their numbers and it’s a very big challenge to my work as a visual artist.” Mupumha is a member of the Fun City Theatre Band, an innovation he came up with together with Noel Marerwa of the Seke Mutema fame. The theatre hub, which is based at Chitungwiza Arts Centre, has attracted interns to record a music album. “I love art more than anything else on earth. I fuse it with music, dance and theatre,” Mupumha added.