Popcorn is a delicious snack that most people enjoy. It’s an easy snack that can be made in no time, and it’s cheap to make as well. It’s great that it comes in so many flavors, too! It’s crunchy, salty, and can be enjoyed with various toppings. It can even be healthy if you’re careful about adding salt and oil. Popcorn is great for movie night, taking the experience to the next level by bringing enjoyment and memories with it. You can always buy a bag and throw it in the microwave, but it’s worth spending the time to do it right. The best way to make popcorn is to use a stovetop popper or air-popped popcorn. It only takes a few minutes and can be done in many ways. Here are some straightforward tips on making delicious, fluffy, and healthy popcorn. Once you cook popcorn on the stove, you’ll wonder why you ever thought microwave popcorn was good enough. Stoves cook differently than microwaves, and popcorn is sensitive to the difference. You want to use good quality oil and get all of the kernels to the right temperature at the same time. Popcorn bags offer solutions for convenience in packaging and shipping, but their compromises can weigh on the end-user. Put a couple of kernels in the oil while it’s heating up. When they pop, you’ll know the oil is at the right temperature. Quickly add the rest of your kernels into the oil, making a single layer at the bottom. Cover the pot and take it off of the heat. Let the kernels sit in the hot oil for 30 seconds. This will bring all of the seeds up to just below the popping temperature so that when you put them back on the heat, they’ll all pop at the same time. Ordering internationally from Garrett Popcorn is a great way to get your popcorn making supplies. If you’re having trouble ordering overseas, check out the guide for some tips to make your life 1000% easier. Cover the pot with a colander lid or leave the top slightly open. The key is to keep the oil hot while letting steam out so that your popcorn doesn’t get soggy or chewy. Popcorn is a popular snack for movie night. It can be enjoyed with a variety of toppings, from butter and cheese to caramel or even peanut butter drizzled on top. It’s good made at home or bought from one of the many wonderful stores that offer many different varieties. If you’re careful with the butter and salt, it can even be a healthy snack. It’s naturally low in carbohydrates, and filled with air, so you can eat a lot without gaining weight. Try recipes that include herbs to make an extra special and healthy snack.