BY LIFE &STYLE REPORTER LOCAL gospel musician Rose Mambo says her music is slowly penetrating the South African music market amid revelations that she has enlisted the services of top producers in that country. Her previous production Lujulile had received rave airplay on a number of South African radio stations so was the song’s accompanying video which got a lot of audience from that country. Mambo, who has roped in gospel sensation Tembalami in her latest single, Winner, told NewsDay Life & Style that she was happy her music was receiving recognition beyond the borders. “I am grateful and humbled that my music, especially Lujulile has been able to get a bit of an audience in our neighbouring countries, especially South Africa,” she said. “I have South Africa-based producers like Zakio and Ian Hlongwane, who have asked me to collaborate with them on beats that they have come up with. It is work that is in the pipeline and I believe it’s going to be a good experience and exposure for me.” The gospel diva said she was happy that her latest production Winner was doing well locally and had the potential to shake the regional music scene. “The song Winner, like I indicated, has had a warm reception and I believe it has the potential to get regional recognition. It’s also starting to have airplay on most of the local radio stations and its YouTube views have also been promising,” she said. “The Winner video has also been received well and the views have been quite promising. As it stands, it has surpassed all my songs, including the famous Lujulile in terms of the YouTube views.” “I have also seen snippets of the Winner video doing rounds on social media and other social blogs and pages, which is quite encouraging.” The songstress said roping in Tembalami had given impetus to her latest production. “Tembalami is an energetic artiste with lots of discipline and stands for what he believes in. He is one artiste who puts his all into everything he does,” she said. “I believe he brought into the project his energy and style which is obviously different from mine. I also believe merging the two brands brought out something unique and special to both his fans and mine.” Mambo said she was passionate about music which had seen her investing so much in it. “I have had the opportunity to study the music industry and have learnt so many things. For most people including myself, music is a passion and we get involved in it to fulfil that passion. It, however, does not end there,” she said. “Music brands have to be well-maintained and nurtured. There is a need for good branding in terms of what you invest in your music and in yourself as a personal brand. This starts from the quality of the music, the freshness of the sound to ensure its acceptability to the listeners, investing in quality videos and proper social media management, among other things.” She added: “We have great artistes that have invested meaningfully in their musical brands and I have been strongly inspired by them and endeavour to do my baby steps and do what I can.” “Fans should look forward to a number of music projects this year, especially collaborations with local and regional artistes.” Mambo has three singles under her belt, including  Lujulile, Ezintabeni and Winner.