BY NYADZOMBE NYAMPENZA AWARD-WINNING artist Calvin Chimutuwah said he was offering free guidance, and awards to up-and-coming visual artists at the Calvin Art Award 2022 with the collaboration of Calvin Art, Prudie and Artillery Gallery. Chimutuwah told NewsDay Life & Style that young artists in Zimbabwe aged from 18 to 26 years may apply for a five-day workshop that culminates in a juried exhibition with cash prizes. “Aspiring artists can take advantage of this rare opportunity by applying before the end of March deadline,” he said. “Applicants are required to send one image (JPG format not more than 5MB), of their artwork, which could be a drawing, painting, or sculpture, together with a 150-word statement (word document) about themselves, their age and what inspires them.” Chimutuwah said participants would be given provisions and equipment to create two artworks that would be showcased in a group exhibition at Artillery Gallery. “Participants will also receive advice from experienced artists on how to successfully navigate the art scene in Zimbabwe as well as at the international stage. “The huge information and interaction gap between established and up-and-coming artists is the main reason for the workshop,” he said. “We will select 10 lucky promising artists for coaching by established artists that include Franklin Dzingai for printmaking, Hugh Mubaiwa for painting (expressionism), Leslie Johnson, painting (landscapes), Ronald Mutemeri on sculpture using clay and Prudence Chimutuwah for collage-mixed media.” He said the adjudicators were Doris Kamupira, Jane Taylor, Peter Kaunda and Masimba Hwati. “I want young artists to be equipped with technique, approach and content development. The idea is driven by a desire to share everything creative that I know,” he said. “Also knowing the rich talent in local artists who started practice before me, and my contemporaries. That talent should be passed on to the next generation.” Chimutuwah said participants would have portfolio reviews, get advice on college application for further studies, and witness demonstrations on drawing and painting. Follow us on Twitter @NewsDayZimbabwe