BY TERRY MADYAUTA
FORMER Highlanders coach Methembe Ndlovu has been appointed head coach at Trinity College in the United States. The tactician replaces Mike Pilger who retired at the end of the 2021 season. “We are thrilled to welcome Methembe to the Bantam family and have him to write a new chapter in the long and storied history of men’s soccer at Trinity College,” Trinity Athletic director Drew Galbraith said. “His history with the game is marked by success at every level. Methembe has a clear vision for our men’s soccer programme that includes competitive success and the holistic development of our student athletes. “He is a skilled teacher and his passion for the game is contagious.” Accepting his new job, Ndlovu said: “Trinity College stands apart in its student-centred culture, reputation for excellence in both academics and athletics, commitment to the whole person and deliberate fostering of an environment of inclusion. “I am truly honoured to accept the position to head the men’s soccer team at Trinity College and join the team of extraordinary coaches and staff. I am grateful to Drew Galbraith, Kristen Noone and the entire search committee for selecting me for this role.” Prior to his appointment, the former Warriors star had stints as head coach with Albuquerque Geckos, Highlanders FC in Bulawayo, Boston Bulldogs and Bantu Rovers. He was also a player assistant coach with the Cape Cod Crusaders in 2002, before he led them to win a  National Championship in 2003 when he landed the head coach job. However, what remains unforgettable is the time he spent at Highlanders as head coach from 2006 to 2008. He led the club to a Caf Champions League qualification in 2006 and the Confederations Cup in 2008. From 2007 to 2010, he was the Young Warriors coach where he guided the squad to the Cosafa championship in 2007 and to the Cosafa silver medal in 2008. Ndlovu went on to found and serve as CEO and technical director of Bantu Rovers for 10 years, from 2008 to 2017.