BY HENRY MHARA/MICHAEL KARIATI
The heartbroken Warriors team has received a major boost after utility player Jordan Zemura flew into Cameroon last night to join the squad at the Africa Cup of Nations (Afcon) tournament. The Bournemouth left-back’s participation in the tournament was delayed by a series of positive COVID-19 cases at his English Championship side. He missed Zimbabwe’s 1-0 defeat to Senegal in their Group B opener on Monday afternoon. Sadio Mane scored a stoppage-time penalty for the Lions of Terranga to break the Warriors’ hearts. Zifa yesterday confirmed that the 22-year-old had left his base in England and was expected in Cameroon last night. “Jordan Zemura arrives in Cameroon tonight. He is expected in Bana tomorrow. The Warrior delayed joining the team due to COVID-19-related issues,” Zifa said in a statement. Zemura was scheduled to arrive in Cameroon last week with the rest of the Warriors squad, but his travel was delayed after a bout of COVID-19 hit the Bournemouth camp. “Can’t wait to join the boys, and represent my Zimbabwe,” Zemura posted on Twitter. “Two important games to get out of the group: everything is possible.” He is now available for Zimbabwe’s must-win second Group B match against Malawi on Friday. The Warriors’ final group game is on Tuesday next week against Guinea at the Stade Ahmadou Ahidjo in Yaoundé. Zemura’s availability is a huge boost for the Norman Mapeza-coached side, which is trying to recover from the heartbreak caused by Mane’s 97th minute winner. The Warriors put up a brave performance against the continent’s top-ranked team and were seconds away from collecting an unlikely precious point against the west African giants, which could have been Zimbabwe’s first clean sheet at the Afcon finals at the 13th attempt in five appearances at the biennial tournament. But two mistakes by Kelvin Madzongwe late on undid all the gallant work that he and his Warriors teammates had put in as the Lions of Teranga walked away with an undeserved victory. Deep into the fourth minute of added time, the FC Platinum midfield enforcer miscued a clearance that was recycled back into the danger area by Senegal. Madzongwe then turned his back on a strike by substitute Pape Gueye and the ball hit his outstretched hand. Guatemalan referee Mario Escobar immediately pointed to the spot, and despite protests from the Warriors players, the video assistant referee backed the on-field decision. Mane dispatched the penalty with ferocious power to beat goalkeeper Petros Mhari, who went the wrong side to hand Senegal, one of the favourites for this tournament, a perfect start. Mane admitted that they were very lucky to walk away with the three points. “You need certain characteristics in this kind of match and you know we were playing in the sun, so it was not easy,” Mane said in his post-match interview. “Physically, the Senegalese team also suffered because we did not have a friendly match before the tournament and that too did not help us. But hey, that’s no excuse. It’s the first match, we won in the end, and it’s the most important for us.” Mapeza hailed the team’s performance, but he will certainly demand an improvement, especially upfront, where the team fired blanks. The strikeforce has been a problematic area for the team in recent times. Since Mapeza took over the Warriors job, the team has scored just two goals in six matches. Prince Dube was given the nod to lead the strikeforce against Senegal, but the former Highlanders star was generally off colour and was replaced at halftime by Tino Kadewere, who didn’t do much himself. Other strikers at Mapeza’s disposal are David Moyo and Admiral Muskwe, both expected to be given a chance in the remaining two matches. Victories in those matches will guarantee the Warriors’ qualification to the knockout stage, which will be their first.