BY AGATHA CHUMA
SEVEN-YEAR-OLD gospel singer Anashe Gonye was the toast of the Zvishavane community after she scooped the budding artiste of the year gong at the recently held Zvishavane Music Awards ceremony. Veteran singer Obert Chari was charmed by Gonye’s exploits and requested a collaboration with the youthful star. The Mebo hitmaker told NewsDay Life & Style that he was mesmerised by Gonye’s talent.
“After listening to the melodious voice of Anashe, I travelled all the way from Chegutu to Zvishavane just to meet up with this girl and her parents,” Chari said. “My request to collaborate with her was overwhelmingly accepted and I guarantee that the song would come out very soon. “I appreciate the love and support Anashe is getting from her parents who managed to identify their daughter’s talent and understood her at such a tender age.”
Gonye’s mother Edinah Siziba expressed joy over her daughter’s achievement and the opportunity to collaborate with Chari. “I could not believe that my child was the one standing on the stage with so much courage and confidence while she was being handed the award,” she said. “It took me by surprise to see Chari coming to my place just to appreciate the gift my daughter holds and above all ask for a collaboration, this is something big, words alone cannot express the joy I have for my daughter.” Siziba said her daughter was inspired by actor Roxy (character from the movie Let it Shine). “With the help of a local (Zvishavane) producer Master Flex, Anashe last year managed to produce four singles, Mommy, God Bless Marian (dedication to her school, Marian Junior School), COVID-19 and Christmas Time,” she said. “As the mother, I help her with writing the songs. She only gives me an idea of what she wants to sing about and I pen the lyrics for her.” She added that as a family they supported Anashe.
“We always make sure that during the course of the week she concentrates on her studies and then during holidays or weekends she does music so that she does not mix the two,” she said. Follow Agatha on Twitter@AgathaChuma