EcoCash Holdings Zimbabwe Limited’s edtech unit Akello, says parents must take advantage of its affordable digital education platforms to keep their children safe and up to date with their schoolwork during the COVID-19 pandemic. All around the world, educational institutions are looking to online learning platforms to continue educating students in the “new normal” triggered by the pandemic. However, the development has been slow in Africa due to a lack of investment in infrastructure and limited access to information and communication technology (ICT) devices. But Akello, a digital edtech company dedicated on transforming African education through technology, is changing the narrative with its unique content and platforms that are accessed from as little as US$1 per month. The company believes that while schoolchildren are hardest hit by the current national lockdown as a result of rising cases of coronavirus infections and the need to protect citizens, learning should not stop. “The spread of the coronavirus has led to the loss of school time in the last two years. We are committed to playing our part in providing access to lessons and books for students remotely, through online platforms, to ensure learning continues,” said the company. Zimbabwe is currently dealing with the forth wave of the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in the government delaying the reopening of schools. From years of research, Akello has developed tailor-made learning programmes that suit every student, recognising that every student is on a different learning journey and has a different learning style. Some students are visual learners, while others prefer to learn through audio. Similarly, some students thrive in a classroom setting, while other students are solo learners, who get distracted by large groups and prefer to work on their own, or in smaller groups. “With that in mind, we believe our online learning system, with its range of options and resources, is best positioned to create a perfect learning environment, suited to the needs of each student. “Our platform also allows students to experience face-to-face interaction on a digital platform with highly qualified teachers as well as gaining access to high-quality learning materials. This offers a huge advantage to students who may not otherwise be able to access in-person learning,” added the edtech firm. Akello provides affordable digital educational content aimed at up-skilling learners from primary school up to university, and it also offers unparalleled access to learning materials which complements existing learning methods and systems. Under its diverse portfolio, Akello has Smart Learning, a revolutionary product providing interactive digital learning platform experience for primary and high school learners. Students only pay US$1 per month to have access to this platform. Akello Pre-School, a seamless learning platform for early-years educators, tutors and home-schooling parents, allows ease of teaching and learning, at a cost of only US$5 monthly to students, or US$60 per year. Akello Library offers a wide range of up-to-date, carefully curated academic and revision textbooks, targeted at primary and secondary school learners for a fee of only US$1,50 per month, or US$18 per year. “With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the subsequent lockdowns, learners more than ever require alternative learning tools to help them advance their education,” the company said. “Our Akello digital learning platform is positioned to do just that, and tackle the gap created by missed learning opportunities, whether they are due to the existing shortage of physical textbooks and teachers in some areas, or due to the impact of the current lockdowns on learners across the country.”