Johannes Marisa
THE year 2021 was a miserable year because many people succumbed to COVID-19 with many others suffering from the effects of the coronavirus. Zimbabwe managed COVID-19 well with many lives having been saved at a time when many prophets of doom thought we were going to be decimated as a nation. It is known globally that Africa has poor resources, poor infrastructure and a shortage of health personnel, among other problems. However, the few remaining health personnel stood tall to contain the dreaded COVID-19 and we became more victorious than many of the developed countries that lost thousands of their people. We thank God for the guidance we got despite the vilification we got from the agents of scepticism. A functional strategy is what is needed to sail through turbulent waters. Last year had three intertwined waves of the COVID-19 with the second wave extending from December 2020 and lasting up to March 2021 while the third wave had the Delta variant strangulating people from end of June to end of August. The number of cases admitted with respiratory complications was high and many hospitals were overwhelmed. Health professionals remained astute and managed to contain the virus with government imposing lockdowns, enhancing vaccination processes, scaling up testing and creating more beds for admission. All health professionals were permitted to attend to COVID-19 patients  and many patients managed to access health services. Medical professionals were applauded as heroes of the nation. Many people succumbed to COVID-19 and it is not a secret that health professionals were among them. It is gut-wrenching to lose colleagues in the line of duty. The other sad part was that many patients with relatives in the medical field went on to complicate. Medical practitioners complained about interference in the management of such patients with some relatives prescribing treatment over the phone. I wonder why our colleagues in the diaspora think we do not know what to do yet the country performed better than many European countries in terms of COVID-19 management if both morbidity and mortality are taken into consideration. Zimbabwe boasts producing some of the best medical professionals in the world hence the high rate of brain drain that is crippling the health sector. Medical treatment requires discipline and following of guidelines that are given by practitioners attending to the patient not merely “Dr Google”. Many patients lost their lives because of the arrogance of relatives who claim to know more than everyone just because they are in the diaspora. Medicine is a complex field that requires discipline not barking instructions over the phone. We lost relatives and friends because of pride as we taught them how to self-test, self-prescribe medication and self-manage even complicated cases. Desaturation became a common phenomenon as patients developed respiratory distress syndrome. Death was inevitable. We admit, we have our ills as a nation and we expect government and other stakeholders to work round the clock to address the following: We hope for a better 2022 in terms of health service delivery. All ills should be nipped in the bud for a better Zimbabwe. Say no to corruption and save the nation from collapse. And let us all value our health workforce!