BY LIFE & STYLE REPORTER
FACE of Kariba Trust yesterday appointed popular commercial model and television personality Geraldine Mandengenda brand ambassador in its efforts to market the resort town as a safe tourist and investment destination. The Face of Kariba Trust was formed to promote the resort town as a tourist and investment destination, through pageantry, arts and events. In an interview with NewsDay Life & Style yesterday, Geraldine said with the help of her management, she committed to work hard to complement efforts at attaining a vision shared by the Kariba community and its stakeholders. “I am humbled by the honour bestowed on me to represent Kariba as its face. I am aware of the responsibility that comes with such an appointment,” she said. “I am grateful for the confidence shown in me by the Face of Kariba Trust board and everyone who was involved in recommending me and making such a decision. As I take this position with the utmost respect and dignity that it deserves, I promise to do my best to discharge my duties and undertake the responsibilities to the best of my abilities.” Geraldine, who is also a brand influencer and voice-over artist, said there were great opportunities that needed to be harnessed in Kariba. “There is no doubt that Kariba has the potential of becoming a leading tourist destination locally, regionally and internationally. There are a lot of opportunities that are offered by the local authority and the government for investment in Kariba in terms of infrastructure, tourism, agriculture and more,” she said. “Kariba is a beautiful place, known for many sites among them being home to the largest man-made lake by volume, the iconic Kariba Dam, its cultural diversity and being home to the culturally-rich Ba-Tonga people as well as the tasty Kariba bream and many more.” Face of Kariba Trust founder Alois Chimbangu said Geraldine’s appointment was in line with their masterplan and the need to market the resort town. “As part of her (Geraldine) ambassadorial duties, she will be responsible for maintaining a positive brand image of Face of Kariba through brand awareness, both online and offline, promoting events on different social media platforms,” he said. “The young and energetic team driving the Face of Kariba has vowed to ensure that the town is connected to the world and the world is tightly linked to the resort as Kariba remains key to the country’s economic revival efforts.”