Real Madrid have reportedly wrapped up an agreement to sign Kylian Mbappe on a free transfer this summer. The Paris Saint-Germain forward is out of contract at the end of the season and has yet to extend his current arrangement at the Parc des Princes. From January 1, Mbappe has been free to negotiate with clubs from abroad ahead of sealing a pre-contract agreement. Real Madrid have been chasing the World Cup winner’s signature for several months, having seen multiple bids rejected in the final throes of last summer’s window. And PSG could now be staring at losing out on £170million, with Madrid reportedly set to sign him on a free transfer… paying him a cool £200million total salary to move to the Santiago Bernabeu. Los Blancos president Florentino Perez took aim at PSG for not selling the player, saying: “The state owned clubs don’t sell their players. It’s a madness. “Now we offer €200m (£170m) for a single player and they don’t sell him. When players finish their contract it’s better.” Los Blancos president Florentino Perez took aim at PSG for not selling the player, saying: “The state owned clubs don’t sell their players. It’s a madness. “Now we offer €200m (£170m) for a single player and they don’t sell him. When players finish their contract it’s better.” PSG sporting director Leonardo quickly hit back, taking aim at the LaLiga giant’s transfer approach: For the last two years, Real Madrid have been behaving like this, it is not correct, illegal even because they contacted the player. It is unacceptable for us, because it is not correct. “It is proof of the strategy: an offer comes one year before the end of his contract and seven days before the end of the window. “They want us to reject, to show to Kylian that they tried everything and to start negotiating for next year.” Perez’s patience approach now looks to bear fruit with BILD reporting that Mbappe will sign a five-year contract with a basic salary worth more than £40million-per-year. The two European heavyweights meet in the last-16 of the Champions League next month and the German publication state that confirmation will not come before those two legs have been played. Mbappe has been in fine form for PSG, netting 19 goals and 15 assists in 27 appearances, but has made it clear that he would be looking to move on. He told RMC Sport last year: “I asked to leave, because from the moment where I did not want to extend, I wanted for the club to receive a transfer fee so that they could bring in a quality replacement. “This club has given me a lot, I have always been happy [during] the four years I have had here, and I still am. “I said it early enough so that the club could react. “I wanted everyone to come out of this stronger, that we leave hand in hand, to make a good deal and I respected that. “I said, ‘If you don’t want me to go I will stay’.” -Mirror