BY NIZBERT MOYO/PRAISEMORE SITHOLE
MDC-T vice-president Thokozani Khupe yesterday rubbished her suspension from the party and announced that she had taken over as party leader from Douglas Mwonzora, whom she claims had fired himself. Khupe made the remarks while addressing a Press conference which was largely attended by her supporters in Bulawayo. Her remarks came a day after the Mwonzora-led MDC-T executive announced that it had suspended her pending investigations into seven charges, including violating the party’s code of ethics. Khupe was accused of undermining the party leadership, failing to discharge duties as deputy president, holding meetings with parties hostile to the MDC-T and laying false charges against Mwonzora. “Some of these actions were calculated to bring the name of the party into disrepute. You shall not, during your suspension, do any activities, including external activities emanating or deriving from your position as the deputy president of the party unless with the prior written notice from the president,” the suspension letter read. But Khupe said Mwonzora was an illegitimate party leader after he assumed power fraudulently. “Mwonzora has already notified Zec [Zimbabwe Electoral Commission] that he will contest upcoming elections under the MDC Alliance party. In so doing, Mwonzora has fired himself because in terms of the MDC-T constitution Article 5.10., members of the party shall be terminated if a member joins or supports a political party other than the MDC-T, termination of membership in these circumstances is automatic,” she said. “This year on January 21, 2022, I announce that the MDC-T has split and there are now two MDC-T formations, one led by yours truly Khupe, who is the Leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly and the other.” Khupe ruled out mending ties with Mwonzora as she said their political differences were irreconcilable, accusing the latter of being “determined to violate and mutilate the party constitution every step of the way.”