Mason Greenwood’s girlfriend Harriet Robson has posted several shocking posts of serious injuries that she has suffered, claiming to be the victim of abuse from the Manchester United star. The social media influencer uploaded a number of pictures, videos and voice notes to her Instagram story, including one of her lip badly bleeding and several bruises to her face, body and thighs. With blood flowing from her mouth in one video, a caption read: “To everyone who wants to know what Mason Greenwood actually does to me.” An audio file was also uploaded to her story that detailed a graphic scene involving a female voice in communication with a male voice. The posts have since been deleted from Harriet’s Instagram account. United made the following statement in light of the posts: “We are aware of images and allegations circulating on social media. We will not make any further comment until the facts have been established. Manchester United does not condone violence of any kind.” Greater Manchester Police issued a statement to Mirror Football which did not confirm any names, but said they were looking into the matter. The statement read: “Greater Manchester Police is aware of images and videos circulating on social media. Enquiries are ongoing to establish the full circumstances.” Sportswear giants Nike, who sponsor the player, also released a statement to The Athletic which read: “We are deeply concerned by the disturbing allegations and will continue to closely monitor the situation.” The couple had been dating since school where they first met at Mersey School in Greater Manchester but had split up in 2020 prior to Greenwood’s debacle with England. On his first call-up to the national squad, the striker sneaked in two Icelandic models in the team hotel along with Phil Foden despite strict instructions to quarantine.  Three Lions boss Gareth Southgate ended up sending the United ace home, along with Foden, who also had a girlfriend at the time. Despite the incident, the couple rekindled their relationship two months after and had been together since. What action is set to be taken remains to be seen after Harriet’s claims were broadcast to nearly 200,000 followers on Instagram. Greenwood is an up and coming star for United, where he has won over the approval of club legend Sir Alex Ferguson, who regarded him as one of the best young players in the world. He said: “He’s got the coolness and the coldness of a great striker. “He never panics, his shots are always low, he’s always inside the posts. He’s shown great qualities.” The 20-year-old has made 24 appearances for the Red Devils this season, scoring six times and has a contract until 2024, with an option to extend by another year. The forward has played one time for England – coming on as a sub against Iceland two days before his team hotel debacle.  He has not played for the Three Lions since though Southgate did say: “He is in our thoughts, I’ve spoken with him and his club, he is a player we really like.” Greenwood has been warned at United for a number of breaches of discipline during his short time in the first-team squad. And rumours arose this season of a rift with Cristiano Ronaldo, who joined from Juventus last summer in a surprise reunion with the Old Trafford outfit. Reports emerged that the five-time Ballon d’Or winner had clashed with Greenwood over his reluctance to pass while the two are looking to play in the same position. -Mirror 