BY WINSTONE ANTONIO
SUNGURA artistes Peter “Young Igwe” Moyo and Mark Ngwazi have fought many battles on who is the star of the genre between the duo and this never-ending battle is on this Friday when they clash again in Chiweshe, Mashonaland Central province. Both the Utakataka and Njanji Express front men confirmed to NewsDay Life & Style that there will be fireworks on stage at St Alban’s primary school in Chiweshe. Ngwazi, famed for his rich satirical lyrical content, and Moyo, the heir to the well decorated Utakataka Express throne, have kept Sungura alive at a time the genre whose title is arguably in the hands of the legendary Macheso, is under threat from Zimdancehall music. Interestingly, the clash will happen in the presence of the First Lady Auxillia Mnangagwa who will be the guest of honour at a tree planting event taking place in Mazowe South Constituency. The latest clash comes courtesy of NatBake owned by businessman Tafadzwa Musarara who is also the chairman of the Grain Millers Association of Zimbabwe (GMAZ). The fight, however, may not end on Friday and will probably continue in the route the Alick Macheso and the late Tongai Moyo took. “Yes, its game on, the clash this time is in Chiweshe one has to be there on Friday so as to witness it as it happens,” Ngwazi said. Meanwhile, NatBake Marketing Manager Anne Nhongo said they subscribe and believe well in environmentally sustainable development at every level. “As NatBake we associate ourselves with the afforestation efforts that seek to achieve the twin-goal of maintaining and enhancing the beauty of our environment whilst boosting the livelihoods of our people,” she said. “As Natbake we are ploughing back the support we are getting from this market. The event, we believe, will inculcate the culture of tree planting at household level.” Nhongo added; “The two musicians we chose (Moyo and Ngwazi) appeal to our target audience and we have worked well with them on several occasions. The community of Chiweshe appreciates both musicians.” High profile business personalities and politicians are also set to grace the occasion. Follow Winstone on Twitter @widzoanto