BY HENRY MHARA Dynamos have begun flexing their muscles in the transfer market after they announced the arrival of two big names at the club yesterday ahead of Premier League resumption early next month. The Glamour Boys, who got a US$60 000 war chest from their principal sponsor Sakunda Holdings to sign players, have snatched 2019 Soccer Star of the Year first runner up Ralph Kawondera from FC Platinum and young Brendon Mpofu, who was with rivals Caps United last season. The 31-year-old Kawondera is joining on a one-year contract. Details of Mpofu’s contract could not be immediately ascertained. Reports also suggest that they have agreed terms with Yadah FC live wire Issah Sadiki, with the winger’s unveiling said to be imminent. Former striker Evans Katema is also reportedly on his way back to the club, which is also on the lookout for a goalkeeper. But it is the arrival of Kawondera and Mpofu that could prove to be the biggest coup for Dynamos in the transfer market. The former Triangle linkman Kawondera is joining as a free agent after his contract with FC Platinum expired at the end of the year. He may have struggled for game time at Mandava, but his qualities are without question and he is expected to add value to Tonderai Ndiraya’s side already looking strong. Twenty-one-year-old Mpofu, who has also played for Bulawayo Chiefs before, is expected to assume the left-back position that has proved problematic for Ndiraya in recent times. Young Tinotenda Muringai, who appeared to have made the position his before the league season was interrupted by COVID-19, has failed to live up to his earlier promise. This has forced the coach to use utility player Godknows Murwira as a makeshift left-back in recent times. Dynamos’ main problems are in the strike force with the club having scored just two goals in 12 matches this term despite having five strikers. At least five players are expected to leave the club to make room for new arrivals. Some of those that may be offloaded include strikers David Temwanjira, Newman Sianchali, and midfielders Tinotenda Chiunye, Ali Maliselo, Jarrison Selemani and Takunda Mawarire. The Premier League season, which went on a break to give way for the Africa Cup of Nations tournament, is expected to resume in the second week of February.