BY TENDAI SAUTA VISUAL artist Tracy Chatsama Tazvitya says her artifacts were for story-telling and fall under the theme Once Upon A Time, Paivepo, a traditional way of starting an oral folklore in Shona. Tazvitya, who operates at Chitungwiza Arts Centre told NewsDay Life & Style that her carvings were a blend of fine art and creative narratives of Shona people and their tradition. “I have several titles to my creative works aimed at bringing families together through preaching unrelenting love using stone art such as Mother Love, Passionate Love, Unconditional Love, If I Had a Child and United Family,” she said. Tazvitya urged the corporate world, tourism industry, marketing and advertising experts to embrace and fully utilise artistic talent. “I wish that we could have sponsorship for technical equipment, marketing and selling while our involvement in exhibitions, cultural exchange programmes and exposure is also further enhanced,” she said. She added: “Our transport costs for raw materials are still too high and l rarely spend close to a week chipping and pruning stones at my sites to reduce weight and size.” “The exercise can be good when testing for durability and malleability, but can compromise creativity and desirable outcomes.” Tazvitya says she started carving as a girl and now takes pride in being a family woman. “Stone art has transformed my life and l see life in stone. I encourage women to take this challenge,” she said. Tazvitya reckons that her marriage to veteran sculptor Morgan Tazvitya has been full of artistic lifestyles. She recently wrote her piece of history after one of her carvings from and on the theme Once Upon A Time Paivepo titled Family Union became one of the best forty selected pieces at Chitungwiza Arts Centre by Pathfinder Ubuntu Non-Profit Company for auction in America. According to Shona Bradford, a co-founder of Pathfinder Ubuntu said, Tazvitya’s artifact, that is part of the 100 pieces, is an exceptional range that will display Zimbabwean Shona sculpture creativity when sold in the United States of America. Follow us on Twitter  @NewsDayZimbabwe