BY TENDAI SAUTA
NATIONAL Gallery of Zimbabwe in Mutare regional director Elizabeth Muusha has urged art lovers in Manicaland to come and learn the history and heritage of Zimbabwe at the ongoing Zim @41 exhibition that closes at the end of March. Muusha told NewsDay Life &Style that the exhibition, which features seasoned artists like Valentine Magutsa, Thakor Patel, Shepard Jangano and Misheck Masamvu, speaks of the country’s history in the past four decades. “The Zim @41 exhibition is an informative display suitable for all ages and people should come in their numbers as so far, visits are low. We are urging learners, who are currently on an extended holiday due to COVID-19 to also visit this exhibition,” she said. “They can even come as individuals since the educational exhibition complements the school curriculum especially in speaking Zimbabwean culture documented by its own people, ” she said. Muusha said the National Gallery in Mutare had the mandate to give exposure to visual artists in  Manicaland province. “Nyanga and Mutare districts are top on the list of participation in the gallery exhibitions with male artists dominating. This gender inequality revealed in the districts is of concern to us as a regional office,” she said. “Funds permitting, we would like to hold awareness and capacity-building workshops with the less-privileged. On viewing and sale at Mutare Gallery are paintings, sculptures, constructions and textiles from various artists.” She said while several galleries were carrying out online exhibitions in a bid to curb the spread of COVID-19, power cuts made it difficult to market exhibitions. “Despite the challenges of COVID-19 the gallery is still open during normal working hours. There are times we recommend all to visit so as to understand and appreciate our country through visual art,” she said. Muusha said despite immense talent, most artists quit the profession due to economic challenges. She said Manicaland had home-grown exhibitions such as Manicaland Show of the Arts, The Independence Exhibition and Rudo neTariro among others that have helped in raising a new generation of artists. The gallery works with young people like Christwish Malunga, Tatenda Gwarada, Ian Mugarandega, Malon Marume and Enock Matumbure, among others.