BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA
CAPS United president Farai Jere remains bullish and happy with the team’s solidity despite the departure of several key players. The Green Machine lost defender Brendon Mpofu to Dynamos, Carlos Mavhurume (Ngezi Platinume and Webster Tafa (Simba Bhora) while reports had also suggested that promising defender Tafadzwa Jaravani had also left to join an unnamed Division One side. However, it has emerged that Jaravani has decided to stay behind. Speaking for the first time yesterday, the Caps boss trashed reports that the team had been decimated by the exit of several players. Following the departure of some players, Caps have signed veteran strikers William Manondo and Rodwell Chinyengetere while Clive Augusto, Simba Nhivi and Leeroy Mavhunga are still part of the squad. Dennis Dauda who has been playing for Napsa Stars in Zambia, returned yesterday to rejoin the Green Machine. Jere maintained that with an array of stars in the dressing room, they were the team to beat. “I don’t know what you guys are writing about when you talk of player exodus at Caps. Who are these players that have left? Remember, we had 36 players, so do we need all these players? For your own information, it was good riddance because the coach didn’t want some of them. What I can tell you is that the only player we lost is Brendon Mpofu. And you say Carlos Mavhurume has left to join Ngezi and we have brought in Denis Dauda from Zambia. He has already arrived, he didn’t take time to think about rejoining. When he heard our situation, he said he wants to come back and help the team.  We  also have two good goalkeepers Simba Chinani and Tonderai Mateyaunga. We also have Devon Chafa who brings that stability. Now look at the forwards, we have brought Manondo in place of John Zhuwawo, we also have Rodwell Chinyengetere, Clive Augusto and Simba Nhivi. The coach will be spoilt for choice,” Jere said. The Caps boss, after addressing players as they prepared to kick off training today said the team which endured almost three months without getting their salaries in one of their most trying times was in high spirits following a capital injection that has seen players getting their dues. The Green Machine had struggled since November last year to pay its players owing to financial challenges . However, Jere said everything was back to normal and the team was in high spirits as players had been paid. “The team is in high spirits; we are going to see double sessions tomorrow. The morale is high in the team,” said. Caps failed to fulfil its last league match against Black Rhinos before the league went for a break to pave way for the Warriors participation at the 2021 African Cup of Nations finals.