BY AGATHA CHUMA/CHIEDZA MAZHANGARA
Award-winning gospel musician Janet Manyowa opened the year on a higher note with the release of a new track titled Vaudze which is accompanied by visuals. The video of the song has already received rave public reviews. It comes at a time when Manyowa recently held a concert dubbed “A Night of Thanksgiving” (Anot), which featured South Africa-based Zimbabwean gospel musician Takesure Zamar Ncube, Pastor G, The Unveil and Joyfull Praise Choir. Manyowa has released three albums with more than 18 singles, which feature local and regional collaborations. She has won a number of accolades, including local and regional awards. Upcoming plans for 2022 Manyowa told Newsday Life & Style that fans should expect more music as she has already started working on her next album set for release by end of year. More concerts, videos and collaborations should also be expected in 2022. Current album She recently dropped a new track titled Vaudze together with its visuals. The video reached more than 15 000 views, 1 000 likes and 46 000 subscriptions within 24 hours of its release on YouTube. Vaudze video was shot in Victoria Falls with the support of Gateway Stream, Bush-Tracks Africa and Zambezi Helicopter Company. The video also features performances from MMX dance group. In the video, Manyowa boasts of being an overcomer and gives a word of encouragement. Reaction from fans A lot of people took to YouTube and Facebook to air their views on the new video, with popular gospel musicians such as Olinda Marowa congratulating Manyowa for successfully delivering a January gift to the nation, “Awesome work my sister well done,” Marowa posted. Some of Manyowa’s fans also appreciated the energy which she exhibited in the video. It seems like Manyowa’s visuals were the major highlight as most of the comments appreciated the good quality and great performance she delivered. Bishop Andile Musambasi, a top fan has even made a cover mbira version of the song Vaudze as a way of showing his love and appreciation for the great work delivered by the Zadzisa hit-maker. “The reception has been absolutely fantastic, it has been encouraging. We thank God,” Manyowa said. Achievements In 2017, Manyowa successfully launched a TV talkshow called Redeemed. The talkshow focused on interviewing various gospel artists, gospel leaders and Christians who have a story of redemption to tell. She has been listed among the 100 most influential young Zimbabweans under 40, and in 2018 and 2021 she was named as one of the top 50 most inspirational women in Zimbabwe by the Institute of Corporate Directors in Zimbabwe. In 2020, Manyowa was appointed the brand ambassador for ZB Bank Limited and Rainbow Tourism Group. The gospel diva has scooped numerous awards both in and outside the country including the SABC Crown Gospel Awards. She has won several accolades from radio stations that include Star FM, Radio Zimbabwe, Power FM and Diamond FM as well as Rainbow FM South Africa. Her song Zadzisa won the Song of the Year gong on Star FM, Power FM, Zifm stereo and Diamond FM in 2017. She attributed her success to God and the unwavering support from her husband Munyaradzi Manyowa, JMM team and Gateway Stream. 