With the pace of smartphones being developed and released, there’s always something new waiting. So, it’s no secret that with 2022 just being a couple of days away, there’s much anticipation for the next big thing. Let’s take a look at five of the most innovative new smartphones planned for release in the new year. The best new phones coming in 2022 Whether you’re due for an upgrade or looking to invest in something smarter and faster, the phones on this list will definitely impress. So, be ready to increase your mobile data budget in 2022! Vodacom comes with great Christmas offers, so you can check for new data packages now. Apple iPhone SE 3 According to analysts, the iPhone SE 3 could launch as early as in the first half of 2022. This new phone is expected to get 5G support and a major boost in performance. This next-generation iPhone may also be the first to get Face ID. There are some rumours that the new phone will keep its retro look, however, that’s yet to be revealed. Samsung Galaxy S21 FE ‘FE’ stands for Fan Edition. According to Samsung, this means a more affordable version of a Galaxy flagship. The Galaxy S21 FE is expected to offer robust performance at a more budget-friendly price tag compared to the standard GalaxyS20. This is because premium materials are swopped for high-quality plastic, as well as a rear camera setup with a lower resolution (Even though the selfie camera is still expected to come in at a sharp 32MP). With its powerful performance and lower price, this phone could prove a firm favourite. Its launch is expected in the first few months of 2022. Google Pixel 6a This extraordinary new phone has seen its first leaks. According to insiders, it has a similar design to the Pixel 6 models. It also looks as though this new model could feature a dual camera. There’s no telling what might power it yet, or how much it will cost; however, the planned release month so far is May 2022. Nokia 10 Nokia may be known as the ‘lost company’ but it is gearing up for a big comeback in 2022. Recently the brand had launched many good smartphones but most of them weren’t as successful in the market. Now, rumours suggest that Nokia is planning to introduce its flagship device Nokia 10 early in 2022. This new phone is expected to be packed with 5G technology and its cameras will be supported by PureView technology. Not much else is known about the phone, but considering the hype, it looks to be a noteworthy device. Xiaomi 12 Xiaomi 12 is planned to release in the first four months of the new year, just after Samsung plans to launch its Galaxy S22 series. In this smartphone series, the Chinese tech giant is expected to release three models, the Xiaomi 12 Pro, the Xiaomi 12, and the Xiaomi 12 Ultra. Many small details have already been leaked about the new device and the complete series. The most interesting of them all is that the phone will be powered by Qualcomm’s incredible Snapdragon chipset. Expect faster performance and sleeker designs in 2022 With the world becoming increasingly more digital, the leading mobile companies are working hard to design better smartphones with advanced features that make tasks more convenient. In 2022, you can expect to see new smartphones released with more powerful performance, better camera resolution, expansive displays, built-in robust security, and more elegant designs. So, if you’ve planned to buy a new phone in the next few weeks, hold on, because 2022 is looking to be a big year for smartphone releases.