By Desmond Chingarande
City of Harare has partnered a local private company Augur Investments to face-lift Warren Hills Golf Course into a world class 18 range golf course as well as drive range and a club house. The golf club has been lying idle for several years due to neglect and resources to keep the elite sporting venue running. In a statement by the City of Harare acting chamber secretary Warren Chiwewe clarifying the joint venture said the golf course is owned by Sunshine Developments a joint venture company between City of Harare and Augur Investments. “The land is owned by Sunshine Developments a joint venture company between City of Harare and Augur Investments,” Chiwewe said. The joint venture agreement was that the City of Harare will provide land and Sunshine Development will contribute US$7 million for the development of the land. “We are currently working on development plans for the golf course.  We will be continuing with the Golf course and currently the Golf course is run down comparing it to what it was 20 years ago so it needs significant attention. We believe we as private developers will make it world class,” West Properties chief executive officer Kenneth Raydon Sharpe said. Sharpe said they have since engaged Peter Macintosh, a top designer of golf courses in Africa to redesign the golf course.. “He provided plans for the Golf course and we are in the final stages of finalising a contract with him. It will remain an 18 range golf course as well as drive range and a club house. We believe as the top developer in the county we want to create a place where people can work, play, and shop in the same area,” he said. Sharpe said environment concerns have been raised around the area but extensive studies have been done by EMA over the last two years to establish were exactly saying he will work with involved stakeholders to make sure that whatever elements need to be protected are protected. The company has engaged in several projects around Zimbabwe and at Mbudzi Roundabout along Harare-Masvingo road they have already acquired the development permits to construct a shopping mall.