BY WINSTONE ANTONIO LOCAL film production company Invision Studios has combined forces with homegrown digital media and research firm GetSetSkill to produce a romantic comedy feature film titled Just Say Hello. The feature is currently under production in Harare. The film, co-written by Andrew Hammond and the production’s director Denise Edwards, tells a tale of love and growth, sprinkled with light humour and life lessons focusing on characters that find themselves entangled in resolving their fears in order to find love. It features a talented all-star line-up of both established and up-and-coming actors from Zimbabwe and South Africa. The film’s co-author and director Edwards in a statement said the filming of Just Say Hello kicked off in December last year and production was set to be wrapped up next month. “The film Just Say Hello is a universal story of love that we know will appeal to audiences all over Africa and the world. It will premiere in April 2022 with plans for a big screen premiere event in Zimbabwe,” she said. “Filming a movie with a tight budget during a pandemic has its challenges, but we have pushed through as a team and we are excited to bring this project to the big screen and major streaming services.” The film’s executive producer Blessing Chinanga said initial production was self-funded, but as they started to tell the story to potential investors and sponsors, they garnered a lot of support from local and United States of America firms. “We would like to thank our main partner on this project VAYA Africa for believing in our vision and providing key support for our cast and crew for the duration of filming. It has been a true blessing to have a proudly Zimbabwean company support us throughout this journey,” Chinanga said. Part of the film’s cast include renowned singer Ammara Brown, Tendaiishe Chitima, actor and producer Shaun Mundawarara, South Africa-based actress Chiedza “Chi Mhende” Mhende and multi-talented comedian Carl Joshua Ncube. Representing Mzansi is South African actor TK Sebothoma from the Netflix drama Kings of Jo’Burg. Invision Studios has produced several movies and television shows that have been distributed and broadcast on DStv, Showmax, ZBC TV and various streaming platforms.