BY HENRY MHARA NGEZI Platinum Stars could have probably made the biggest catch in the player transfer window with reports that they have snatched up the pair of Carlos Mavhurume and Tapiwa Sibanda to beef up their squad in pursuit of  their first Premier Soccer League championship. No official comment could be obtained from the club, but sources confided to NewsDay that the two Warriors trialists have joined the club. “The two have signed contracts and are now Ngezi Platinum Stars players,” said a source. “Coach Rodwell Dhlakama wants to bolster his defence and the two’s arrival is a clear statement that the club means business this season. The club is still active in the market and a few big names are expected to sign in the next few days. A number of players are also expected to leave,” the source added. Ngezi Platinum Stars chief executive officer Nyasha Kadenge refused to divulge much of her club’s dealings in the transfer window, saying they will “soon unveil their new players as per the norm.” Mavhurume, a tough tackling defender is joining from Caps United and his departure is a huge blow to the Green Machine whose camp continues to be decimated as they have also lost skipper Ronald Chitiyo, who refused to renew his contract and leftback Brendon Mpofu who joined Dynamos. Mavhurume has impressed since joining from Herentals two seasons ago and his outstanding performance saw him making the Warriors squad for both the African Nations Championships and the Cosafa Cup tournaments last year. Sibanda, a rightback joins from Cranborne Bullets having also played for Black Rhinos before. He was part of the Cranborne Bullets team that reached the Chibuku Super Cup semi-final stage where they were eventually booted by Ngezi Platinum Stars. He did so well during the tournament and did not only impress Dhlakama, but also caught the eyes of Warriors interim coachMapeza who went on to include the fullback in his Afcon provisional squad. Sibanda could not make the final squad to Cameroon. Reports yesterday also suggested that Ngezi could also be closing in on another Warriors trialist Delick Murimba to replace their star striker Nyasha Chintuli, who is reported to be on his way to Manica Diamonds. The Mhondoro Ngezi-based side has publicly stated its desire to win the league championship this year. The miners were also very busy in the transfer market in 2020, recruiting the likes of Denver Mukamba, Devon Chafa and Wellington Taderera, while they added Marvelous Mukumba to their squad last year. Ngezi have started this season well with two wins and a draw in their opening three matches. Dhlakama’s men, who lost in the Chibuku Super Cup final to FC Platinum, currently sit second on the log standing behind Manica Diamonds who are yet to drop points this far. The league championship race, which took a break to pave the way for the Nations Cup tournament, resumes on February 12.