By Kevin Mapasure
KUNDAI Benyu might probably have never dreamt of featuring at the 2022 Africa Cup of Nations (Afcon) finals in Warriors colours considering how, since his last dance with the team in 2017, he had been frozen out. But with the call-up that surprised everyone and himself included, he could find himself being at the centre of the Warriors set-up as they bid for a place in the knockout stage of Africa’s premier football tournament which kicks off in Cameroon on Monday. Benyu was called up at the eleventh hour as coach Norman Mapeza assembled his final 23-member squad on the eve of the Warriors’ departure for the global showcase. With such a shock in the final squad, everyone sought to findout why Mapeza had plucked the dreadlocked former Celtic midfielder from the obscurity of the Iceland third-tier league for such a competition. Mapeza’s response was telling. “We spoke about it at length. We wanted someone creative;  we wanted someone who will give us box-to-box runs and Kundai will give us that,” he said. Since Mapeza took over the Warriors top job in the World Cup qualifiers, the team struggled for goals. That the former Warriors captain chose to rope in Benyu at this crucial time shows that Mapeza means business at the continental showcase. Zimbabwe open their Afcon account with a clash against Senegal’s Lions of Teranga on Monday before they take on Guinea on Thursday, while their last Group B instalment will be against Malawi on January 18. The Senegal squad is dominated by Europe-based stars and a cursory look at it often sends shivers in the spines of Zimbabwean football enthusiasts. But the Warriors are not reading too much into the names, but are promising a fight. After a draw in a friendly match against Sudan, Mapeza promised a few surprises in the group. “I think the guys played well, especially in the first half. We created some clear-cut chances. Unfortunately, maybe the sharpness is not yet there, but I am more than pleased with the performance,” he said after the game. In that match, Zimbabwe missed a number of key players, including skipper Knowledge Musona, striker Tino Kadewere and Jordan Zemura, who had not joined the squad. “If we can have the same performance and the same desire which I saw today towards our first games of the tournament, I think there might be some surprises,” Mapeza added. Zimbabwe will be missing a number of key players, chief among them, the marque midfield duo of Marvelous Nakamba and Marshal Munetsi who pulled out through injury, but it could be Benyu, with a lesser profile being the ex-factor. It is difficult to judge any player by what one sees on YouTube, but it does give an idea of what to expect. Benyu looks a real deal, if his video highlights both at Scotland and in Iceland are anything to go by. He often makes forays into the box, scores, assists and is not afraid to take on defenders. In fact, he possesses a good right foot for set pieces. It is anybody’s guess what Mapeza plans for the three group matches as he plots a route to the knockout stages, but it looks like Benyu will be a key figure in his line up. Mapeza has so many options at his disposal in all areas of the field, even though he would have wanted to have Munetsi and Nakamba in the fold, he might have struck gold in his Benyu pick. The preparations have gone well, under the circumstances, they managed to get game time against Sudan, but lost out as they could not play Cameroon as had been planned, but the players will admit that they have been looked after better compared to previous tournaments. They managed to get at least two weeks of preparations even though foreign-based players trickled in over the last few days. Musona only arrived in Cameroon on Wednesday while Admiral Muskwe joined the team yesterday. There were still doubts about Jordan Zemura’s availability yesterday due to a COVID-19 outbreak at his club. But this time, the setback has been more about injuries rather than the administration itself. Zimbabwe will go into their match against Senegal free of the pressure of expectation, with many tipping the Sadio Mane-led side to roll over their opponents. Senegal have named a galaxy of stars in their squad which draws all of its players from top European leagues unlike Zimbabwe who have Kadewere of Lyon as the only player with global status. Warriors leftback Onisimor Bhasera gave a reassuring message that the team could salvage something against the Afcon favourites. Bhasera is unfazed by the big name stars in the Senegalese line up ahead of their opening match on Monday. Bhasera (35), one of the most experienced players in the squad, said they will not intimidated by the big names as they also believe in themselves despite the difference in status. “We just need to do our job and give our best on the field. In football, you always need to have confidence and belief, not to be intimidated by the opponents no matter what,” Bhasera said. “It is not always about the stars, what is important is to go there with a commitment to do the job and the result will take care of itself. Even if you lose you need to remain focused for the next game without burying your head in the sand. We are looking forward to it and we are looking at going beyond the group stages.” Like Mapeza predicted, it could well be a tournament of surprises.