Erasmus Makarimayi
ALMOST every well-meaning believer assents to the reality that the Bible contains the word of God and that the word is the truth. They believe it means what it means. Where healing and deliverance are declared in the Bible, they confess that truth. However, the challenge comes on acting on the truth they confess. The more I grow in the things of God the Father, the more I internalise the word and actualise it. I don’t say that I have taken hold of every promise but what I’m still working on, I do that in faith. Let’s look at healing for a brief moment. In the New Testament 1 Peter 2:24, records: “Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were healed.” Our healing is a past tense reality. We are not trying to beg God to heal us. He has already provided the healing. The issue is do we take it. 2 Corinthians 1:20, New King James, assures us: “For all the promises of God in Him are Yes, and in Him Amen, to the glory of God through us.” So under the New Covenant, Jesus Christ sorted out all the promises so that we partake of the inheritance among the sanctified. I want us to look at the promise in the Old Testament. Please note the tenses. Isaiah 53:5 records: “But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: The chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed.” By His stripes we are healed. 1 Peter 2:24 above reads: by whose stripes ye were healed. Under the New Covenant, our healing was procured. So what should we do? If you have sore feet, just stand up and walk. That is called acting on the Word. If you are in bed with fever, get up and go about your business. Jesus says in John 6:47: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting life.” Believing is having. It is possession. Mental assent admires the Word, confesses that the Word is true and very desirable, but it doesn’t possess. Believing ends in the glad confession: “It is mine. I have it.” How little real action on the Word we see today. I have borrowed some words here from E W Kenyon. In Mark 2:1-12 we read the story of a man who was brought into the presence of Jesus by four of his friends. Jesus said to him, “rise, take up thy bed and walk.” Had he not acted on the Master’s words, he never would have been healed; but because he acted, he was healed. Luke 5:5 Peter said: “But at thy word I will let down the net.” What a change would come into some of our lives if we said: “At Thy Word I will.” We have clung to the theories of men and ignored the Living Word. Healing and victory belong to you. When Jesus said to Peter: “Come, walk the waves with me”, Peter acted on the word. There are many examples we can quote. In John 2:1-11, when the servants filled the firkins with water, they obeyed what Jesus said, and the water became wine. We generally mentally assent to the integrity and the reality of the Word; but we do not act on it. Until we act upon it, it does not become a reality. You may hold the Resurrection Truth as a great doctrine or dogma, but it will not mean anything to you until you say: “Jesus died for me. He conquered death and hell for me. He arose for me. And because He arose I am a victor, I am a conqueror of Satan today. Satan has no dominion over me. I am free.” Then the Word becomes something more than a doctrine or a theory. It becomes a reality. People who act on the Word receive things. Today, dear believer, the one who acts on the Word receives. You act faith, you talk faith; your actions and your words agree. You are a believer. All you need to do is act on the Word. It is deeply important that you learn this simple little lesson. It is not struggling, or praying, or crying. It is acting on what God has spoken that brings results. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, To the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen. Grace and peace be multiplied to you through knowledge.