BY VANESSA GONYE
Palestinian ambassador to Zimbabwe, Tamer Almassri has called on the Israeli Apartheid State to release Palestinian administrative detainees who were taken hostage by Israeli forces as the Palestinian occupation continues. He said the embassy of the State of Palestine condemns the abominable Israeli occupation state’s practice of administrative detention that the occupying power uses as a tool of repression against Palestinians. “We call for the immediate release of all Palestinian detainees including Hisham Abu Hawash languishing in hospital after an extensive hunger strike for 141 days which teetered him close to death this week. Hisham Abu Hawash, a father of five begun refusing food in August to protest Apartheid Israel state’s holding of him without charges or trial a practice of arresting suspects for renewable six-month terms without allowing them to view the charges or evidence against them,” he said. He said Israel continues to use administrative detention to imprison more than 4600 Palestinians (1595 in 2021 only) including minors and elderly without charges, trials or convictions, all based on so called “classified secret information” that the detainees have no access to. According to Almassri the detainees have no recourse to challenging these undisclosed allegations, and they do not know when, or if, they are going to be released. “The occupying power persists in its pervasive violations of international law and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to freedom, justice, and self-determination because of the utter failure of the international community to hold Israel accountable for its egregious violations.” “This collective international failure has allowed Israel to, among other crimes, shatter the lives and rights of tens of thousands of Palestinians victimized and persecuted through administrative detention,” he said. He said the State of Palestine is disappointed with the international community’s failure to act against the Israeli violations in the occupied Palestinian territories. “While we welcome the statement from the European Union which expressed grave concern over the health of the detained Hawash, We therefore, call on the progressive peoples, governments and human rights organizations to condemn and push for the immediate release of detained Palestinians and work to end this monstrous practice once and for all,” he said. Palestine has been under Israeli occupation for decades. Over the years, there have been massive reports on human rights violations against Palestinians despite constant calls to abolish them.