BY Kevin Mapasure
The Zifa secretariat has set January 29 as the date for the emergency general meeting (EGM), that could culminate in the Zifa board members’ mandate being revoked. The suspended Zifa board, led by Felton Kamambo, has scoffed at the allegations levelled against it by a section of the congress, claiming that the members who have called for the meeting are being used by the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC). Kamambo and crew yesterday released a statement saying they were unfazed by the allegations, and questioned why the allegations raised by the congress were similar to those they face from the SRC. Xolisani Gwesela, who to some is the acting general secretary, yesterday released a statement calling for the meeting, emphasising that it would go ahead even if the suspended Zifa board members failed to attend. “Reference is made to above subject matter: The Zifa secretariat acknowledges receipt of correspondence from some Zifa members dated January 3, 2022 and their call for an extraordinary congress in line with Article 28 of Zifa constitution,” the statement
read. “The secretariat has verified the credentials and authenticity of members who called for the meeting. The members who appended their signatures to a letter to the Zifa secretariat are bona fide Zifa members. It is noted that the Zifa executive committee as well as the general-secretary are suspended by the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC), and are, therefore, not able to meet as a board to convene an extraordinary general congress. Please note the provisions contained in Article 28(2) of the registered Zifa constitution of 2013 which now applies and we quote: ‘If an extraordinary congress is not convened, the members who requested it may convene the congress themselves’. “Therefore on behalf of the 27 members who make up more than one-third of the members of Zifa, the following notice and agenda is issued. “All of the Zifa executive committee members have been notified of the charges and have been requested to attend the extraordinary congress.” Gwesela listed on the agenda the possible revocation of Kamambo’s executive committee. The Zifa secretariat said the meeting would deal with: Earlier in the day, the Zifa executive committee members had boasted that they would tear apart the alleged charge sheet. “While the Zifa executive committee has no qualms with any constitutionally provided process and will easily dispense with the so-called charge sheet, it is the nature of the alleged charges most of which are identical to the SRC allegations and which to date have not been substantiated and led to Fifa dismissing the SRC inspired suspension, that raises suspicion.” The executive committee members said they would follow the constitution, but warned that the new developments could fuel the fire in Fifa corridors. “While the EGM request shall be addressed, the board, however, fears and reasonably so for an imminent Fifa ban upon our country due to SRC’s illegal suspension,” the said. “The current shenanigans may only add paraffin to water, instead of the intended results by the few who are being misled or coerced into thinking false allegations will all of a sudden turn to truth and stick.” Some of the allegations against the Zifa executive committee include turning a blind eye on match-fixing, protecting colleagues on sexual abuse allegations, diverting COVID-19 funds from Fifa and Confederation of African Football, setting up rural leagues without informing the congress and also diverting equipment meant for Zifa members to other uses. The board is also accused of forcing the Premier Soccer League to accommodate a club that had been relegated in 2019.