BY AGATHA CHUMA LOCAL actor and film director Zolile Makeleni popularly known as Tsotsi in showbiz, says he was happy to be living his dream in the film industry and promises more productions this year with the aim to spread his brand beyond the borders. Tsotsi told NewsDay Life & Style that preparations to introduce a new lifestyle television show that will be focusing on Zimbabwean culture are already in motion. “For a start this year we are working on a new lifestyle show titled Dine with Tsotsi which shall be filmed in Zimbabwe and neighbouring countries namely Botswana, Zambia and South Africa,” he said. “The show is mainly designed to showcase lifestyle, food and culture. Moreover the show is about Zimbabwean culture and culture in general, so we are starting locally showcasing our very own way of living then proceed to other countries.” Tsotsi said the forthcoming show was inspired by what he encountered while travelling. “With travelling experience that we have had over the years we decided to make Tsotsi a regional brand, hence the title Dine with Tsotsi,” he said. “With the show, we shall be sailing to the best places to eat or just visit in a unique way as I work with a team of very talented minds Kuda Murombedzi and Nyasha Kaseke.” Tsotsi said judging by the achievement of his previous shows Rockbottom, a 2020 production and Isithembu that followed a year later he was optimistic that the forthcoming show would be a success. “Not only are we confident, we believe in whatever we do. “Research is one of the key factors that has helped us in succeeding, right now we discovered that in Zimbabwe there is no show such as Dine with Tsotsi and that pushed us to create one,” he said. “For the show, we have joined hands with a number of corporate partners who are helping to make it a success.” Apart from introducing a new show, Makeleni said he was also working on a new drama series titled Perfect Secrets based on ofpsychology. As of 2022, Tsotsi said he had been involved in over 15 television productions among them Wenera, Cook Off, Wadiwa Wepamoyo, Makomborero and Sunningdale Casanova.