By Tendai Sauta ELLS PICS STUDIO appears to become a favourite of many artistes if productions coming from their workspace are anything to go by. The studio is run by the trio of Eliakim Sikireta, Ngonidzashe Ruzvidzo, all graduates from the then Global Academy Film School and marketer Arlington Mawarire. Sikireta took expertise in special effects, while Ruzvidzo specialised in film at the academy that has produced the multi-award winning film, Dust and Fortunes. In an interview with NewsDay Life & Style, Sikireta and Ruzvidzo said they had harnessed experience to challenge celebrated Hollywood productions. “After graduating from the Global Academy, We started capturing pictures and videos at weddings to market ourselves while we gathered momentum and trust by the market. My family then assisted me and my friends with space to continue with the creative work,” Sikireta said. “We are very grateful to this generous offer and we have so far done our best. We are now a household name in photography, graphics, branding and filming. We have also provided media space for films and videos for celebrities such as Baba Harare, Ammara Brown, Freeman and Takura, among others.” Ruzvidzo added: “In addition to what we studied in college, we now do audio productions and marketing and advertising materials.” Sikireta’s father Ackias Plaudious said sky is the limit for Ells Pics Studio proprietors. “For these youngsters (Sikireta, Ruzvidzo and Mawarire), the sky is the limit. This is a chance for them to participate in a market that has their peers who really have nowhere to work from and this gives them an edge,” he said. “The boys have talent which needs support both technically and financially. They need to be thorough, concentrate and produce just quality workmanship to attract the right cliental and gain global recognition.” Ells Pic Studio has over three years of its establishment produced documentaries and films for corporates as well as musical videos for several musicians like ExQ’s Katakwe, Myke Pimp’s Harare Hairarwe and popular television dramas Kuchina, Statements and Organised Crimes.