BY TERRY MADYAUTA VETERAN coach Moses Chunga finally registered his first win in the Central Region Division One since joining Airforce side, Chapungu. Chunga had an indifferent start to life in the unfashionable lower tier league, with his side picking one point in their first two matches. However he helped the Gweru based side bounced back at the weekend when they laboured to a 2-1 victory over FC Platinum U19 in a match played at Mandava stadium on Saturday. “It’s a good win away from home and we hope to keep winning. The league is still in its infancy and this is where we have to set the base for the final marathon,” Chunga said. “Our players slowly getting it right and they are confident of winning many games including our two games in hand.” The Airmen have two games in hand where they hope to collect to cover maximum the gap between them and the early pacesetters, Sheasham. They face stiff competition from Sheasham, Tongogara and Kwekwe United, who all have already showing that they are up to something in this campaign. Chapungu have four  points on their tally, and are seven points shy of the log leaders, Sheasham, and they hope to close the gap when they finally fulfill their games in hand. In the other fixtures played at the weekend, Vumbachikwe played gallantly at Pelandaba stadium to force a share of spoils after a goalless draw with Sheasham. Tendai Chikuni’s TelOne drew 1-1 with Kwekwe United who have sofar proved to be one of the teams to beat this season. Kwekwe United are third on the standings, with the Wifi boys occupying forth position. Second played Tongogara maintained their winning momentum after collecting maximum points on the road when they beat  Filabusi United 2-1 in Filabusi. Beitbridge based Dulibadzimu grabbed rare 2-0 over ZPC Munyati, who themselves are still struggling to find their rhythm after being ditched by coach Rutherford Matondo who joined TelOne to be Chikuni’s assistant. MSU’s below par sojourn continued as they were held to a 1-1 draw by Loss Control at Greasham grounds in Zvishavane, to remain rooted at the bottom of the log table with a paltry point to show off. Gokwe based club, Paramount collected their first set of maximum points of the season with a narrow 2-1 win over Bishopstone on Sunday.