BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA
HARARE football giants Caps United are regretting their failure to secure the services of Harare City forward Clive Rupiya — a long-time target for coach Lloyd Chitembwe. Chitembwe returned to Caps two games into the 2021-22 campaign last year having been in charge at rivals Harare City where he worked with Rupiya. And as he sought to build a squad to challenge for honours, Chitembwe told the club hierarchy that although he wanted at least four players, most of them from Harare City, including defender Marshall Machazane and midfielder Tatenda Tavengwa, Rupiya was top on the  list. However, attempts by the club to lure Rupiya reportedly failed to bear fruit with reports suggesting the Sunshine City Boys’ asking price was beyond Caps’ reach. Caps president Farai Jere admitted that they are ruing the missed opportunity to secure Rupiya. “We are happy with the team that we have. It’s a strong team. It’s the team to beat, but our only regret is that we failed to get Rupiya. The coach had said he wanted him,” he said. Last year, Chitembwe told NewsDay Sport in the build up to their league match against Harare City that Rupiya was a top striker. “Rupiya is a top striker, then there is up-and-coming midfielder Tatenda Tavengwa. I believe he is going to be a great midfielder if he keeps working hard. Then there is Marshal Machazane — a dependable and reliable defender. But equally we have quality to match them. I am happy with the progress my lads have made so far in terms of adjusting to the way I want them to play. We are looking forward to the match,” he said at the time. Nevertheless, the Green Machine, despite losing several players, have continued to strengthen with strikers William Manondo and Rodwell Chinyengetere coming on board to  bolster the squad which already has the likes of  Clive Augusto and Simba Nhivi, among others.  Dennis Dauda, who has been playing for Napsa Stars in Zambia, returned last week to rejoin the Green Machine so has veteran midfielder Devon Chafa. Caps lost defender Brendon Mpofu to Dynamos, Carlos Mavhurume (Ngezi Platinum) and Webster Tafa (Simba Bhora)