BY AGATHA CHUMA
AUTHOR Tatenda Mudzana believes his motivational book, Power of Starting, appears to have served its purpose of empowering people if the feedback from both local and international markets is anything to go by. Speaking to NewsDay Life & Style, Mudzana said he published the book last year with the aim of inspiring people to start with what they ever have. “A lot of people have been coming to my social media platforms with positive responses and some reaching out to me in person appreciating the good work and the uniqueness in motivating them which I displayed in the book,” he said. “I can say that 80% of the people who have read my book across the country were inspired to start their own businesses as they realised the power of starting something. “Some top officials from other countries, which include Ethiopia, Tanzania, United Kingdom, Zambia, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Botswana, have endorsed the book which is what I expected when I wrote it.” Mudzana said Power of Starting explains the best way to start in order to be great and successful with the little one has. “I found out that everyone wants to be influential and become a millionaire, but very few have the audacity and the courage to take the first step, which is the power of starting. “So in this book, I was explaining that the best way to start is to start, you don’t have to be great, but you have to start to be great in order to become the person you desire to be,” he said. “My book not only encourages one to start a business, but also academics, ministry, marriages and even relationships. Everything begins at a certain stage and in different aspects of life. I hope the book will continue changing people’s lives and educating them as well as focusing on almost everything that people encounter on a daily basis” Mudzana believes if people read books, more knowledge and wisdom will be imparted onto them and this could change their mindsets towards life. “You can live many lives and travel to many countries by only reading a book and the experience you get can help in changing your life for the better,” he said. “Through writing, my goal is not to make money, but to empower people, that is why I always give my copies out for free.” He said he would this year publish another motivational book titled The Road to Success is called Failure.