BY TERRY MADYAUTA
Cameroon Football Association (Fecafoot) president Samuel Eto’o has lifted Alvin “Aluvah” Zhakata’s spirits after he offered to settle medical bills at a hospital where the Warriors cheerleader is currently admitted in Yaounde. Aluvah, who has a heart condition, collapsed last Wednesday after suffering heart complications at a hotel in Yaounde following the Africa Cup of Nations (Afcon) round of 16 clash between Malawi and Morocco. The football fanatic is in Cameroon for the Afcon finals at the invitation of continental football mother body, Caf, and has been in the west African nation since the tournament began last month. He remained behind to finish off the tournament after the Warriors were bundled out of the tournament in the group phase. But when he collapsed, reports from Cameroon revealed that the Caf medical team was reluctant to give a hand, especially when it came to bills, a development that might have prompted the decorated Barcelona legend to
intervene. Yet even the Sports and Recreation Commission together with local football mother body Zifa have not made any known efforts to rescue the outspoken national team faithful, hence he needed Eto’o’s timely intervention. Delighted by how the Barcelona legend chipped in to assist, Zhakata posted on Twitter yesterday expressing hope and gratitude. “The president of Fecafoot (Cameroon Football Association), Mr Samue Etoo Fils, has paid my hospital bill, and footed all costs for medical tests and everything. How can I not be grateful. How can I not heal,” he tweeted. How much Eto’o paid to settle the bills has not been disclosed, but his act seems to have reignited hope for recovery in Zhakata, who earlier this week posted a worrisome update about his condition. “Thank you everyone for your prayers and wishes. Totally, overwhelmed with the love and support I got during this bout of illness. The outpouring of love was the best medicine imaginable. Sadly, my heart is failing, but Drs still carrying out tests to come out with the actual diagnosis,” Zhakata posted on Twitter.