By Kevin Mapasure
THE Zifa board members trio of Felton Kamambo, Philemon Machana and Bryton Malandule have been left exposed after fellow executive committee members distanced themselves from the wholesale suspensions of councillors, Zifa and Premier Soccer League (PSL) employees. The Zifa executive committee announced the suspension of nine members of the 27 councillors who demanded an emergency general meeting (EGM) which is likely to culminate in the dismissal of the three officials. They also announced the suspension of PSL boss Kenny Ndebele for his role in organising meetings against the association, Zifa communications manager Xolisani Gwesela and Wellington Mpandare, who is the national team manager, for appointing Norman Mapeza as the national team coach ahead of the Africa Cup of Nations finals in Cameroon. The attempts have left Kamambo, Machana and Malandule exposed. Women’s Football leader Barbra Chikosi released a statement yesterday distancing herself from the so-called Zifa board sanctions on the councillors and employees. She went on to declare the suspension null and void as the three had acted without consulting Farai Jere, Sugar Chagonda and Chikosi. “I have noted with great concern that three of my colleagues in the suspended Zifa executive committee namely Felton Kamambo, Philemon Machana and Bryton Malandule purportedly suspended Zifa employees and officials at a meeting held on January 29, 2022,” she wrote. “ “I would like to confirm that despite being an executive committee member, I was not invited to this meeting and it was not held as per the dictates of our constitution which require a 14-day notice. The suspensions are, therefore, null and void. I also would like to distance myself from all the meetings that are said to have taken place after our suspension by the SRC (Sports and Recreation Commission) on November 16, 2021. I would like to urge my colleagues in the suspended Zifa board to behave in a professional way and not these tendencies of dividing the football family,” she wrote. PSL chairman Jere also said he was being dragged into issues that he had not participated in. The latest development leaves, Kamambo, Machana, who is said to be habouring ambitions to be Zifa president, and Malandule, who is facing sexual abuse charges, without cover and needing to restrategise. According to Zifa councillors, the three have been fighting to block the EGM, which if it take place would see the end of their tenure as Zifa board members. The councillors opined that the suspension of some of their members was a ploy to kill off attempts at an EGM, whose result could be the end of the trio at Zifa. While Fifa gave a temporary reprieve to Kamambo, Machana and Malandule, by ruling that only the board could organise the meeting, at least within 90 days, the councillors have not been deterred and have said they will wait to have their day. The Zifa board members are being charged for misuse of COVID-19 relief funds as well as sweeping under the carpet, sexual abuse and match-fixing allegations. Follow Kevin on Twitter @kevinmapasure