BY SHARON SIBINDI
THE United States embassy in Harare has opened entries for the virtual OneBeat Music exchange programme scheduled to run from July 11 to September 6. The closing date for submissions to be sent via the link (https://onebeat virtual 2022.fsn-apply.org/) has been set as February 11. Launched in 2012, OneBeat is a platform for musical leaders of the 21st century that began as an annual US-based residency and tour programme that brought together early-career musicians from across the globe. It enables musicians to collaborate, produce and perform original music and develop strategies for arts-based civic and social engagement. In a statement, the embassy’s public diplomacy section said applications were expected from musicians aged between 19 and 35 years. “OneBeat is now accepting applications for OneBeat Virtual 2022. This fully virtual residency programme will take place from July 11 to September 6. Musicians aged 19 to 35 are encouraged to apply during the programme dates,” part of the statement read. “The fellowship involves 28 working days over eight weeks to allow for both online connection and asynchronous offline project development time. Selected fellows will attend virtual masterclasses and open studios, participate in online workshops, and produce a final concert streamed to a global audience.” The statement further states that during the eight-week period, OneBeat fellows will investigate new forms of virtual collaboration and work together to write, produce and perform new musical works. “We are seeking applicants who excel in the following areas, musical excellence and innovation — a high level of performance, composition, improvisational, production and/or technological skill.” “Social engagement — musicians who have used music to serve their communities or greater societies, including guiding young people in music education, addressing socio-political issues and reviving dying traditions.” “Collaboration — applicants’ willingness to reach across cultural and musical divides in creating original music or re-interpreting traditional music, while respecting the essence of each tradition.” Successful applicants will be notified of the review panel decision by the end of May. OneBeat provides a chance for musicians and artistes from diverse backgrounds to seek common ground, create new musical combinations, push the boundaries of music technology, and find ways to involve all members of society in the process of musical creativity. In the past, Tariro neGitare and Hope Masike have taken part in the programme.