BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA
AS the Castle Lager Premiership race enters the home stretch, Black Rhinos coach Herbet Maruwa has stoked the flames by suggesting his side will challenge for the title if the top teams continue to stumble, as the Castle Lager Premiership marathon enters the home stretch. While the public discourse on the championship this term has centred on log leaders FC Platinum, Chicken Inn and Dynamos, Maruwa said his side also had their eyes fixated on the coveted title. With just 13 matches left in the campaign, it will take just a few slip ups by the leading teams to throw the race wide open again. And the Black Rhinos gaffer said they were looking to capitalise on further slip ups by the teams at the top as they bid to win the championship for the first time since 1987. Maruwa spoke after his side drew 1-1 against Yadah on Sunday, a result which lifted them to fifth position on the league table with 31 points, 13 behind log leaders FC Platinum. The Zvishavane-based defending champions dropped points for the first time in eight games, following a 0-0 draw with title rivals Dynamos at the National Sports Stadium on Sunday. The draw was their fifth of the campaign thus far, having won 13 and lost three.  For Dynamos, who are in third place on the table behind Chicken Inn, it was their sixth draw, while they have won 10 and lost five. In the past five matches, the Glamour Boys have won just once, drawn twice and lost twice. Chicken Inn in second place with 41 points, have won 12, drawn five and lost four to date. In the past five matches, they won three and lost two. It is in this context, Maruwa is daring to dream of the championship. “I am happy with the point. Yadah have always been a difficult side for us. The last time we played them it ended in a draw and today again we could not be separated. I am sure if the teams at the top continue to drop points the way the way they are doing, we will fancy our chances in this race. I see us challenging for the title,” he confidently said. Black Rhinos had to come from behind to force a share of the spoils against a spirited Yadah, who had raced into the lead courtesy of a penalty converted by big forward Nkosi Mhlanga following a hand ball in the penalty area by Blessed Mbavarira. The lead though proved temporary as the army side equalised late on through a penalty converted by veteran defender Denis Dauda. That resilience and character to stage a come-back, after going down appears to be also giving him grounds for optimism. Besides, the army side have a well organised side with the capacity to turn the league table on its head.