BY Gracious Tapuwa Chishakwe 
A PATENT is an exclusive right granted for an invention. It gives its owner the legal right to exclude others from making, using, or selling an invention for a specified period in exchange for publishing and enabling disclosure of the invention. Also, a patent can be described as a legal document that describes an invention and grants a property right to the inventor or the owner of the invention. Section 2 of the Patent Act [Chapter 26:03] defines patents as letters of patent for an invention granted. Patents are an important part of intellectual property rights and their protection is of paramount importance because it promotes creativity and industrial solutions which allow for economic growth. Protection and registration of patents also foster innovation in that when individuals and organizations protect their ideas and inventions, they reap more benefits and profits. Conditions for patent-ability For a mind creation to be registered as a patent it has to meet certain strict conditions. These are the conditions that the patent officers at the Patent Offices will be considering before registering a patent. The World Intellectual Property Organisation provides that granting of patents is done when the invention is new, non-obvious and can be utilised. A mind creation qualifies as a patent when it fulfills the following requirements: Inventions for which patents may not be granted In most jurisdictions, an invention cannot be patented if it is a scientific formula or mathematical theory, when it is a method of doing business, method of playing games, presentation of information, computer programs and methods for treatment. In Zimbabwe, section 2A of the Patents Act [Chapter 26:03] provides for inventions that may not be patented and these are; Protection of patents The protection of patents in Zimbabwe is governed by the Patents Act (Chapter 26:03). Patents are protected through granting and registration of the patent at the Patents Office where they examine the applications and if it passes the above-mentioned requirements and conditions then the patent may be granted and registered. This is done through the Zimbabwe Intellectual Property Office (Zipo). Patents are also granted by international patent offices and regional offices that carry out examination work for a group of countries and examples of these are the following: It is important to note that in patent protection, the principle of territoriality applies. This principle states that a patent can only be protected in a country or region in which it is registered because patent protection uses the procedures and laws that would have been specified in that particular country or region to enforce and protect patents. If a patent is not registered in a particular region, the protection of that patent is not enforceable in that region because of the principle of territoriality. Lifespan The duration of protection of patents differs with jurisdictions. The Patents Act provides that the term of the patent shall be twenty (20) years from the date at which the application for the patent was lodged. Once the lifespan of a patent registration has expired, the protection of the patent expires unless the registration is renewed. The rationale is that once a patent has been protected for a period of time, the inventor would have benefited from it, and hence it will be time for society to benefit from the invention as well. Infringement Infringement of patents occurs when one uses, makes, or imports a patented item without the permission of the patent owner. Patent infringement also occurs when there is selling of something that contains every element of a patented claim or its equivalent while the patent is in effect. As noted earlier, patents are territorial, hence, infringement can only be possible in a country where a patent is in force. The Patents Act provides for a number of remedies that are available to a patent owner in case of an infringement.