BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA
CAPS United might have picked only one point against army side Black Rhinos last weekend, but they will reflect on a job well done overall, as they head to Mhondoro for a clash against Ngezi Platinum Stars at the weekend. The Green Machine finished the match, which ended in a 0-0 stalemate, with 10 men after defender Marshal Machazane was red-carded for a lunge on Congolese forward Eli Ilunga. Had Machazane not been sent off, the script could have been different. The Harare football giants went into the match seeking a second successive win after their victory over Harare City – the first win in eight matches, and they displayed a vintage show to get a share of the spoils. Their resilience must have won them a lot of admirers. And as they make the trip to Ngezi, there are grounds for optimism. Lloyd Chitembwe’s men are determined to build on their impressive performance in the past two matches in which they have collected four points out of a possible six. The match against Ngezi provides a fascinating sub-plot. Chitembwe will come up against Ngezi Platinum coach Benjani Mwaruwari from the opposite dugouts for the first time. The pair played together for the Warriors at the 2006 African Cup of Nations finals in Egypt, the last time they fought for the country’s badge. On Sunday they face off in a match likely to be feisty. The last meeting between the two sides in Harare ended in a 0-0 stalemate. Ngezi were then under the guidance of Rodwell Dhlakama, but there have been changes in the technical team since then which brought in Mwaruwari. While Caps United have endured a frustrating period in which they went on a run of seven successive defeats, they are encouraged by the spirit in their dressing room in recent days. Caps United are also bringing in a fresh pair of legs with former Harare City forward Emmanuel Mandiranga who made his debut against Black Rhinos last week being the latest recruit. Mandiranga imposed himself in that match and is expected to play a key role against Ngezi. The Harare giants, in 13th place on the table with 21 points, will be looking to climb up the ladder with a win against Ngezi. Ngezi, meanwhile, have been inconsistent winning just once against Bulawayo City in the last five matches, drawing twice and losing twice including the weekend defeat to Herentals. Those results have piled pressure on Mwaruwari who had started well after replacing Dhlakama. The Mhondoro giants are in ninth place with 29 points after 20 rounds of matches.