R Kelly reportedly got engaged to his alleged victim Joycelyn Savage before his sentencing. The Ignition singer, real name Robert Kelly, was sentenced at the end of June to 30 years in prisonfor sex trafficking. According to legal documents obtained by TMZ, Savage, 26, revealed their engagement in a letter to Judge Ann Donnelly. Joycelyn, who is the disgraced singer’s longtime girlfriend, moved out of her family home in Chicago at 17 to be with R Kelly. Two years later, she started losing touch with her family – who have accused him of ‘brainwashing’ their daughter – before completely cutting off contact with them. In the court document obtained by the publication, Savage hit back at being labelled as a victim in her letter to Judge Donnelly, stating: “My name is Joycelyn Savage, and I’m Robert Kelly’s fiancée…” She went on to explain she ‘is not the victim that the government has portrayed me to be.’ “He’s the best thing that’s ever happened to me. We have a very special connection and are deeply in love. I still support Robert to this day because I love him and will always be here to support him,” Savage added. “Robert is not the monster that the government has described him to be. The Robert I know is very sweet, gentle, and kind.” Mirror have contacted R Kelly’s lawyer for comment. Gerald Griggs, who is an attorney for Savage’s parents, told TMZ the family ‘strongly doubts’ the engagement is real. The attorney also said he found it odd Joycelyn didn’t testify about it under oath, but revealed it in a letter. R Kelly was sentenced to 30 years in prison after he was found guilty of sexually abusing women, boys and girls for decades. He was convicted by a federal jury in New York in September last year. Judge Donnelly said he had used his “minions” to “lure young fans into your orbit”, and there were parts of his victims’ testimony she would “never forget”. The singer was branded a “predator” who used his fame and fortune to “prey on the young, the vulnerable, and the voiceless for his own sexual gratification” following his conviction. He was convicted on multiple counts of racketeering, with the charges relating to bribery and forced labour. Kelly was also found in violation of an anti-sex trafficking law known as the Mann Act. The Same Girl hitmaker, who denied all charges, was found guilty on all nine counts against him following a six-week trial. -Mirror