BY HENRY MHARA
DYNAMOS’ chances of winning the league title this season might have suffered a huge blow after it emerged that star player Bill Antonio left the club for Belgium where he has been invited for trials. No comment could be obtained from the club but a reliable source told NewsDay that the speedy winger arrived in the European country yesterday at the invitation of top flight side KV Mechelen. The teenager is expected to spend six weeks at the club where he will be assessed with the hope of signing for the side. The source told this publication that Antonio left Harare on Tuesday and arrived in Brussels yesterday. “Bill is already at Mechelen,” the source said. “They have been following him for some time now. He could have gone earlier but the trip was delayed because of the Covid19 pandemic. The team has started their pre-season and they thought it prudent to assess him during this period. He will be there for a month and a half if all goes well,” the source added. Antonio has been one of the outstanding players in the league this season and his departure is a huge blow to Dynamos who are seeking to end an eight year league title drought. He is arguably DeMbare’s best player this far and has contributed three goals and four assists to their cause. He is the club’s second top goal scorer. The former Prince Edward High School student sparkled during the first half of the season, but has slowed in recent weeks which also coincided with the team’s poor form. He has not scored a goal in the four games that the team played in the second round of the campaign. In those matches, Dynamos has not registered a goal, let alone a win. The poor run of results have seen then losing a lot of ground in the title race where they are now eight points behind log leaders Fc Platinum. They travel to second placed Chicken Inn this weekend looking to end their four match winless run. Meanwhile, Dynamos striker Makanda who was away in South Africa for trials is back at the club. The former Highlanders man spent two weeks with a South African Division One side where he was being assessed.