BY MAGRETH RUZVIDZO
AS the World Athletics Championships commence this Friday in Eugene, Oregon in the United States, Zimbabwe’s triple jumper Chengetayi Mapaya believes he is ready for the competition and has what it takes for a podium finish. The event will stretch up to July 24. The 23-year-old booked his slot for the world meet after winning the National Colleges Athletics Association national championships last month with a 17,26m leap, outclassing the defending champion Emmanuel Ihemeje of Nigeria. In an interview with NewsDay Sport, Mapaya said he is now fine-tuning the preparations before the preliminaries and finals on July 21 and July 23, respectively. “Preparations for the World Championships have been amazing; I’m training well, feeling very confident, mentally strong and physically fit. I’m ready to go and show the world what I’m made of. I should be leaving on Sunday,” said Mapaya. After missing out in one of the biggest events in his career, the rescheduled Tokyo Olympics Games last year due to a hamstring injury, Mapaya is not taking any chances this time as he is focusing on maintaining his physical fitness. “Staying healthy has been the main area of focus. We have worked hard in the off season so, right now I’m just trying to maintain what I have, making sure I’m running fast and just keeping the energy that I have mentally and physically — making sure I’m a full athlete both physically and mentally. We are working on every aspect that has to be done,” he said. “I jumped 17,26m, which is currently number six in the world and was collegiately the leading jump of the year 2022. I feel it’s an honour to be in this position coming from tearing my hamstring in the same competition last year and being unable to compete at the Olympics. I have been working hard to get back from my injury and the work that I’m putting in is paying off. I’m just truly privileged to be in this position. I deserve everything that I’m getting right now because I worked day in and day out to be where I’m right now.” Mapaya also highlighted that he would not be intimidated by his competitors, but will focus on his performance and raise the country’s flag high. “I’m looking forward to compete with the best in the world and this is the start of my professional career going forward. It’s going to set off into my next chapter in my life and that is going professional in triple jump and competing around the world. My goal definitely becomes being the best triple jumper in the world and breaking the world record. It might not be in this competition but that’s in the long run,” Mapaya added. Besides Mapaya, Zimbabwe is fielding two more athletes, sprinter Tinotenda Matiyenga and Isaac Mpofu who will compete in the men’s marathon. Lisimati Phakamile will be in charge of the team.