BY MUNYARADZI MADZOKERE/TERRY MADYAUTA
HIGHLANDERS will be looking to end an awful run of away form which has seen them fail to pick a single league victory on the road in their last 15 attempts when they take on WhaWha at Ascot Stadium in Gweru this afternoon. One has to go as far back as September 25, 2019 to see the last time Bosso won an away game when they beat Bulawayo Chiefs 3-1 ironically at Barbourfields Stadium. In fact, Highlanders have not won a league match away from Barbourfields Stadium since they beat Triangle 1-0 at Gibbo in July 2018, but the club has been in a good nick since the arrival of highly-rated coach Baltemar Brito. Highlanders are currently one of the form sides in the league having won three of their last four matches, including a draw. While he complained about the bad state of WhaWha’s home turf Ascot, Brito declared that his team is gunning for maximum points. “It will be a tough game, but as we have said before, we’re Highlanders and we go with a positive mind. We’ve got respect for WhaWha, but we’re going there for three points,” Brito told journalists. Although his team has been a laughing stock in the current PSL campaign, WhaWha mentor Luke Petros is confident of accounting for the scalp of Highlanders. Highlanders have a spring in their step especially after the emphatic 3-0 home win over Manica Diamonds and will hope to cruise over the relegation-threatened opponents. But winning at Ascot has proved to be a mammoth task for a number of giants, Dynamos, Chicken Inn, Ngezi Platinum and Harare City, in this campaign albeit the prison wardens’ struggles. With that in mind, Petros is brimming with confidence that Bosso’s bubble will burst at Ascot Stadium against all odds. “We are ready for Highlanders; the boys are raring to go. I am positive of getting a win and a good result for our objectives,” Petros said. “The boys have been doing well at home lately and I hope we will build on that good home performance, moreso against big teams. The guys seem to rise to the occasion. Hopefully they do the same against an in-form Highlanders.” At Ascot Stadium, title hopefuls Chicken Inn left with tails between their legs after succumbing to a stunning 3-0 defeat at the hands of the lowly correctional services side. Even Warriors legend Benjani Mwaruwari was left tongue-tied after his dominating Ngezi Platinum were edged 1-0 just before the mid-season break. Alarm bells continue to ring for the former Warriors striker, Petros’ side, as his side appears to be permanent residents in the relegation zone.