BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA
CAPS United’s prospects of turning what has been a nightmare season into a decent one has been boosted by the permanent acquisition of highly-rated midfielder Blessing Sarupinda, while the Green Machine have also robbed Harare City of forward Emmanuel Mandiranga. Lloyd Chitembwe’s side has reached an agreement with South African Premiership side Sekhukhune United for the transfer of Sarupinda. Sarupinda made his name at Caps United after joining from Aces Youth Academy and then moved to South Africa last year to join Sekhukhune United. However, the 23-year-old midfielder, a national team trialist, struggled to hold down a first team shirt at the South African side, where he made just four appearances before he was loaned to second-tier side JDR Stars, where he also made four appearances. With Caps United enduring one of their worst periods in the elite league since 2012, they quickly turned to him after learning that he was available. The initial deal had been for a loan, but it emerged yesterday that the two parties have now agreed on a permanent move for the player, according to a source privy to the agreement. “There is a new arrangement where he (Sarupinda) is now re-joining on a permanent deal. The player has agreed the terms and the pre-contract is already there. What is left is just for him to sign. The club is now awaiting his ITC [International Transfer Certificate] clearance, which should be ready by tomorrow (today),” a source said. Mandiranga is also close to joining the Harare football giants. A former Dynamos player, he is already training with the Green Machine as contract talks continue. “It is the same with Mandiranga. Everything else has been agreed by both parties and the deal should be consummated in a few days,” the source said. “With Ali Sadiki, there is a feeling that the club might not be able to meet his demands, but there is still hope. They have tabled an offer and it will be up to him to decide because you see the club has to balance the scales. “It has to consider his age and the returns on the investment.” Sadiki (34) has been training with the club in the hope of signing a contract after leaving Zambian club Kabwe Warriors. He is, however, no longer reporting for training amid a break down in the talks. The Green Machine, who face army side Black Rhinos in a Castle Lager Premiership tie at the National Sports Stadium on Sunday, are looking to make it two wins in a row after a disappointing spell which has seen them go on a seven-game losing streak that pushed them closer to relegation. However, a 2-1 win last week over Harare City eased tension in the dressing room.