BY AGATHA CHUMA
HER love for acting from a tender age when she would imitate some famous actors while at primary school has since developed into a professional career. Since launching her creative career at the age of 17, Mutare-based Amanda Ranganawa’s venture into the film and television industry has been a mix of being in front of the camera and behind it. For five years, she has worked with a lot of prominent actors across the country and been roped in a number of creative initiatives. The multi-talented Ranganawa’s prowess in showbiz has not gone unnoticed, she has become a recipient of several arts awards and has received endorsements from Africa and beyond. Apart from the awards, Ranganawa, a film writer, actress, producer, television presenter and corporate model’s great work seems to be gaining her a lot of recognition. Recently, her script House of Economics qualified her into the top five for the Writers International Network Zimbabwe writing competition. The enthusiastic cinematographer has also been selected by Zimbabwe Theatre Academy and University of East Anglia to be part of the Emerging Voices, a programme that mentors and trains young playwrights. In the latest development, Ranganawa was roped in by National Arts Council of Zimbabwe to be part of members of the national team to draft the local film and television sector strategy alongside industry veterans. Speaking to NewsDay Life & Style about her achievements in showbiz, Ranganawa said in film there was no secret to success. “I have worked with Danai Gurira (plying her trade in Hollywood) and Patience Tawenga on the play The Convert as the production co-ordinator and learnt a lot from the two ladies,” she said and further revealing that she was actually Gurira’s first intern when she came to Zimbabwe after founding Almasi Arts with Tawenga. “I have also worked with Gyshtt, an American singer who came to Zimbabwe to shoot a music video The Vibe is Right. I was also blessed with an opportunity to work behind the scenes on the Ferguson film telenovela The Queen.” Ranganawa added: “I have also worked with Roberta Wagner from Germany. We did two plays together namely, Who Killed John Doe? and Murder on a Train at Musango Lodge.” “From all these people, I have learnt to always be on time, put all my effort in everything I do, to be ready and to be open to learning new things.” On her view of the country’s film industry, Ranganawa believes local filmmakers now have the chance to produce a lot of films and also learn new things. “With the introduction of more local television channels, we are now seeing a lot of local content being showcased,” she said. “My desire in this industry is that we continue producing more edutainment content so as to raise the Zimbabwean film industry. Also, I
would like to see the industry getting more financial support so that we get opportunities to compete on bigger platforms.”