BY DANIEL NHAKANISO
BANGLADESH Cricket Board (BCB) has confirmed their national cricket team’s tour of Zimbabwe for a limited overs series later next month, confirming a hectic winter schedule of international cricket for the southern African country which begins with the ICC Men’s T20 World Cup Global Qualifier B. The Zimbabwe cricket team is currently preparing for the ICC Men’s T20 World Cup Global Qualifier B scheduled for Bulawayo Athletic Club and Queens Sports Club in Bulawayo from July 11-17. However, they will have very little time to regroup afterwards, with the Bangladesh national side set to make a return to the country exactly a year after whitewashing the hosts in the ODI series and winning the Twenty20 International series 2-1. BCB chief executive, Nizam Uddin Chowdhury said told a Bangladeshi newspaper yesterday that the Tigers, as the national side which is known, will arrive in Harare at the end of July for a three-match ODI and three-match T20 series. “We’ve finalised a fixture after discussing with the Zimbabwe Cricket Board. Since they are the host board, Zimbabwe will release the itinerary. Hopefully they will release it within a couple of days,” Nizam Uddin said. “Bangladesh will leave the country for Zimbabwe at the end of July and we’ll play three ODIs and three T20s against the hosts.” The visit by Bangladesh will come immediately after their tour of West Indies while Zimbabwe will have just finished their qualification campaign for the ICC Men’s T20 World Cup. Zimbabwe recently named cricket legend Dave Houghton as their new head coach, replacing Indian Lalchand Rajput after a string of poor results. Houghton has already set himself the immediate task of winning the upcoming ICC Men’s T20 World Cup Global Qualifier B, where there are two tickets on offer to qualify for the 2022 ICC T2o World Cup to be played in Australia later this year. Eight teams namely Jersey, Hong Kong, Netherlands, Papua New Guinea (PNG), Singapore, Uganda, USA and hosts Zimbabwe will battle for the final two places at the event, which features the world’s best nation in the shortest format of the game.