BY MAGRETH RUZVIDZO
RESPONSE to scheduled World Boxing Council (WBC) All Africa and the Africa Boxing Union (ABU) training workshops is encouraging after 106 people confirmed their participation in the events set for Victoria Falls from July 25 to 27 and July 26 to 27, respectively. The online registration opened on June 1 and closes on July 22. The two events are meant to enhance the technical capacities of boxing officials across the continent and define the governance structure of boxing in Africa for the next five years as well as exploring strategies of modernising and developing boxing at all levels. ABU president Houcine Houchi will preside over both events. Speaking at a Press conference on the state of preparedness for the training sessions, Zimbabwe National Boxing and Wrestling Control Board chief executive Lawrence Zimbudzana said the trainings would help put Zimbabwe on the world boxing map. “We have been provided with a rare opportunity to market the country as a sport tourism destination of choice and at the same time setting the stage for the hosting of future international boxing conventions and tournaments,” he said. “We are not only focusing on Victoria Falls, but Zimbabwe as a whole. That is why we are partnering the Zimbabwe Tourism Authority (ZTA) who are experts and custodians of this particular area. However, special interest will be on Victoria Falls as we seek to make it the hub of all sport activities.” Confirmed guests are coming from South Africa, Ireland, Botswana and Cameroon, to mention a few. “The hosting of these two events, therefore, forms part of our long term plan to use combat sport as a vehicle to contribute to socio-economic development by stimulating tourists in the country. We are anticipating that at least
US$500 000 will be generated through tourism receipts and related economic activities around the two events,” Zimbudzana added. “Media coverage of the events will also increase continental and global visibility of our country as proceedings will be shared with over 190 countries affiliated to WBC and ABU.” Sponsors on board include ZTA, Zimbabwe Sun, Mau Mau Boxing Promotions, Victoria Falls Boxing Academy and the Zimbabwe Olympic Committee, among others. Meanwhile, there will be a boxing tournament on the sidelines of these events hosted by Mau Mau Boxing Promotions in partnership with Victoria Boxing Academy, which will be an opportunity to showcase Zimbabwe’s boxing talent to the delegates and the general public. The tournament will run under the theme The Showcase: The Smoke that Thunders.