BY MAGRETH RUZVIDZO
THE Gems technical team has trimmed the national netball team’s squad preparing for World Cup qualifiers to be staged in South Africa next month. Four players have been dropped so far. They include two South Africa-based players Andile Ndlovu and Thandekile Nyoni as well as the Ngezi Platinum pair of Lizzie Kanyekwere and Taslima Mdimba. All of them have since been released back to their respective clubs. The team commenced its camp early this month at Girls High School in Harare and is expected to run up to July 31. From the 20 players who were in camp, 16 are now left with two more set to be dropped ahead of the tournament. Seasoned players including the team captain Felistus Kwangwa (pictured) and Sharon Bwanali, who missed the Gems tour to Malawi last month are among the players who have remained in camp. Gems assistant coach Tatenda Shinya said they will take a two or three-day break after July 31 and resume their final camp focusing on all aspects to form a formidable side. “We were looking at combinations and we came up with the decision to drop those four, but they were also good and competitive only that we can’t go with 20 players. We are going to drop at least two from the 16 we have so far to remain with 14 players who are travelling to Pretoria,” said Shinya. “Now we are focusing on combinations and concert-rating on our set plays so as game plans, but we are mainly focusing on team-bonding.” Meanwhile, the Gems technical crew has been engaging the men’s select team to help the squad in training sessions and also in assessing the progress they have made so far. On Wednesday, the Gems won overall 76-60 over the men’s team from the four matches they played. “The men’s team has helped us a lot because we are seeing the real picture of what we are going to face in Pretoria. We hope come weekend they will bring their national side also to up the competition,” said Shinya. The Gems have a huge task ahead because they need to finish in the top two in order to book a slot for the World Cup next year. Should the Gems qualify in August, that would be their second appearance at the global meet after their maiden appearance in Liverpool, England in 2019. Gems Squad: Felistus Kwangwa, Priscilla Ndlovu, Claris Kwaramba, Tanaka Makusha, Ursula Ndlovu, Nobukhosi Ndlovu, Nicole Muzanenhamo, Yeukai Chamba, Progress Moyo, Lynette Tanhira, Sharon Bwanali, Elizabeth Mushore, Prudence Sibanda, Beaulla Hlungwane, Tafadzwa Matura, Chipo Shoko.