BY FORTUNE MBELE
HIGHLANDERS coach Baltemar Brito says he would not hesitate to throw 16-year-old attacking midfielder Prince Ndlovu into the fray so that he gains confidence and experience going forward. Ndlovu was promoted to the senior team from Highlanders’ developmental side Bosso 90 after scoring four goals in 19 games. Brito gave him a 12-minute run against Manica Diamonds on Sunday. Immediately after coming in, Ndlovu made some exchanges with another substitute Washington Navaya, executed beautiful footwork, but shot wide in the game that Highlanders won 3-0. “First of all we decided to sign him (Ndlovu) because he has the quality; the age doesn’t matter. He has the quality and we looked at him and the other players in the squad and we felt in this game we had an opportunity for a player like him for him to gain the experience. He needs to thank his colleagues in the squad who played very well, supported him and he had his opportunities,” Brito said. The Portuguese gaffer also played young Muziwethu Dlamini , who was replaced by Adrian Silla after he got a knock in the first half and another youngster, Darlington Mukuli who came in together with Ndlovu in the 78th minute. Brito trusts defender Andrew Mbeba playing on the right, Godfrey Makaruse on the left, while Peter Muduhwa and Mbongeni Ndlovu have been the preferred centre backs. Makaruse, with a flair for attacking, has scored in each of the three games that Brito has been in charge. The midfield combination of Nqobizitha Masuku, Dlamini and later Silla, Ray Lunga and Devine Lunga proved too strong for Manica Diamonds, especially in the second half. Brito has a lot of praise for his boys, but said they should guard against complacency in the face of the victory. “The players have done well in the past six weeks that we have been here and we must congratulate them and we expect that they have to work hard and don’t go to sleep because of these three points. More importantly from this victory is that of course we won but the players understand that they must not relax because if you relax some will come and take your place. You need to continue working hard because if we don’t win the next game it won’t make any sense and in football things can change so quickly,” Brito said. Highlanders rose to position six on the log table after beating Manica Diamonds on Sunday and their next game is against WhaWha away from home.