BY HENRY MHARA
DYNAMOS coach Tonderai Ndiraya  is refusing to press the panic button amid a poor run of results, and believes he is about to turn the team’s fortunes around. A strong start to the season raised expectations that the Harare giants could win their first league title since 2014, but recent results have left them playing catch up to Chicken Inn and FC Platinum. Despite the criticism, Ndiraya remains confident about his ability to turn the tide. “Of course, we are five points behind the top team, but I feel there is still time to recover,” Ndiraya told the media during the weekly Press conference yesterday. “With 15 games still to play, it’s quite a huge number of games left. What we don’t want is to lose ground in the championship race. A lot of ups and downs are going to happen not only on us, but even the teams that are fighting at the top as well as those that are fighting relegation. “We don’t want to press panic buttons at the moment because we are still in the race. We take it step by step, game by game and the next game is very important for us. We just have to make sure that we recover from this slump that we have had in the past weeks.” Dynamos’ next fixture is a tricky one against Cranborne Bullets at Vengere Stadium in Rusape tomorrow. “What is critical is to get out of the phase that we are at the moment and I feel we are slowly getting out of it. Once we hit the purple patch that we expect to hit as a team at some point, then we should be good. We are going through a difficult phase as a team but we will be out of it very soon,” the Glamour Boys mentor said. A section of the team’s supporters expressed their anger after last week’s draw. Failure to collect maximum points against the relegation strugglers tomorrow and Ndiraya knows alarm bells will ring even louder. “We prepared well this week. A few guys who missed last week because of injuries and sickness are coming back,” he said, adding that two key men Trevor Mavhunga and defender Sylvester Appiah, who missed the game against Triangle, have fully recovered and are available for selection. But Junior Makunike is still out injured, and as are Munyaradzi Mawadza and Stephen Chatikobo. Follow Henry on Twitter @henrymhara