BY KEVIN MAPASURE IN BULAWAYO
ZIMBABWE breezed their way to the semifinals of the T-20 World Cup qualifying tournament, but they know that from here on, as they face the United States today, the challenge will be a sterner one. The hosts of the eight-team tournament thrashed Singapore by 111 runs before accounting for a fighting Jersey by 23 runs while the US also had it easy against the same opponents, but the two face a bare knuckle fight for the top spot in Group B. A top of the table finish is important for Zimbabwe in as much as they will mostly likely avoid Netherlands in the semifinals of the tournament. Netherlands are a dangerous side and the te am that faces the Dutch side will be fully aware that they could find themselves eliminated in the semifinals. Zimbabwe have said that they expect to win every match against the associate sides, but they will still want to make sure they don’t have to go through the tougher terrain. Sean Williams, who shone with bat in the two matches so far with two half centuries, said they will not be letting their guard down ahead of today’s match against the US. “It’s important for us not to be complacent; T-20 cricket can go either way. I felt all the small little contributions by each member of the team is huge for us, look at Luke Jongwe, Ryan Burl as well you know those are all match-winning performances. If we continue to focus on those small things and contributing towards the team’s common goal I think we will do really well,” said Williams. Zimbabwe are ranked 12th, while the USA are ranked 26th in the world for this format of the game, but the gap between the two is much closer than the rankings suggest. Everything has gone almost perfectly well for Zimbabwe so far, but they may consider tweaking things a bit with Wellington Masakadza having struggled so far and with the team blessed with a number of spin options, they could consider dropping him for an extra batsman. It will be no surprise though if they were to go with the same team that has done duty so far, but they will be asking for more from Wessley Madhevere who has seen runs eluding him so far. Meanwhile, Zimbabwe pace spearhead Tendai Chatara has been ruled out of the qualifiers after he suffered a collarbone fracture on Tuesday. The experienced bowler sustained the injury when he landed on his right shoulder while fielding during the group match against Jersey. An orthopaedic specialist has recommended surgical intervention to deal with the right clavicle fracture. Chatara is expected to be sidelined from action for at least two months. Tony Munyonga has been called up as his replacement. Zimbabwe will face the United States of America in a Group A decider at Queens Sports Club today, although both teams are already through to the semi-finals scheduled for tomorrow.