Only Chamisa can turn around Zim fortunes
ZIMBABWE needs new leaders as the current ones have dismally failed to turn around the once vibrant economy of this country. It seems Citizens Coalition for Change leader Nelson Chamisa is capable of turning around the fortunes  of the country. He is surrounded by sober people, among them Tendai Biti, David Coltart and Innocent Gonese. The President Emmerson Mnagagwa administration needs to think outside the box and find new ways of revamping this economy which has been reeling at an uncontrollable pace. As the masses, we are spending most of our time fighting over petty issues while the economy is crumbling. All hope has been lost as we watch thousands of university graduates fail to find employment in the formal sector. We are unable to establish the root cause of the sprouting of vendors who are selling all kinds of basic commodities on the streets. It is unemployment which has resulted in such kind of street vending. The people are now tired of cheap politicking which is currently taking place. Mnangagwa has failed to resuscitate our industries which have been dormant for quite a long time. I also fail to understand the position of other opposition political parties that masquerade as democrats and yet continue failing the people and taking them for a ride. These politicians have failed to improve the lives of people who have borne the brunt of their ineptitude. Cry my beloved country. All hope is lost as our leaders have pressed a self-destructive button. They should just swallow their pride and pave way for new leaders who still have the zeal and energy to take this country forward. In 2023, Zimbabweans should vote wisely; vote Chamisa. – Mukunda Chitova ED must restore justice in the country
THE majority of Zimbabweans are complaining on a daily basis that they are wallowing in abject poverty as their standards of lives have deteriorated under the Zanu PF leadership. Sorrow is scribbled all over their faces. To make matters worse, the regime is also arresting political activists and leaders for allegedly fomenting violence or taking part in unsanctioned meetings, most of which will be cooked up charges. A case in point is the recent arrest by police of Citizens Coalition for Change interim organising secretary Amos Chibaya for allegedly holding a meeting without notifying the police in terms of section 7(5) of the Maintenance of Peace and Order Act. He is accused of holding the meeting at Gwindingwi Business Centre in Charandura, Chirumanzu, on April 30, 2022 without notifying the regulating authority. At the meeting, Chibaya is alleged to have addressed over 200 party members. The MP, however, denies the allegations and argues that he never convened such a meeting. In Chitungwiza, legislators Job Sikhala and Godfrey Sithole were arrested for allegedly leading violent clashes between CCC supporters and Zanu PF activists following the murder of opposition activist Moreblessing Ali a month ago. This kind of peacock politics and trying to silence opposition party leaders as we draw near 2023 harmonised elections has no place in modern-day politics. The President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s regime is targeting the pillars of CCC by arresting and jailing them. The law has now become a weapon and not an instrument of justice, especially in scarring opposition leaders. The way the law is being applied for other political opponents is different from the way it is applied to the ruling elite. The masses are aware of a well-known Zanu PF chairperson who incited violence, provoked and threatened to beat citizens at Ali’s funeral wake in Nyatsime. Mnangagwa must find time to listen to the late System Tazvida’s masterpiece Vaforomani, where he was accusing the foreperson of running down the farm. In the song, Tazvida was giving advice to fix challenges faced by farm workers. It’s wise for a leader to read people’s emotions, feelings and pay attention to them. If a leader does not have a listening ear then they must quit. Mnangagwa should just get off the bus and surrender the keys. People have been complaining for some time about his poor driving. He must hand over to someone capable, focused, young and energetic to drive the bus. – Leonard Koni Diasporans deserve the right to vote
AS the diaspora vote debate rages, I bumped into an article in which former Zanu PF political commissar Patrick Chinamasa told a Press conference that: “If you want a diaspora vote, first level the playing field by removing sanctions, so that Zanu PF can go there and campaign freely without being vetted against sanctions.” However, when he addressed Zimbabweans living in the United States on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly, he made it clear that government would work towards ensuring that Zimbabweans living in the diaspora would be able to vote in 2023. I suppose Chinamasa was being mischievous as he cannot go against President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s decisions. Zimbabweans living in the diaspora cannot be sanctioned by preventing them from voting just because the European Union, US and United Kingdom have imposed sanctions on Zimbabwe. Chinamasa forgets that Information secretary Ndavaningi Mangwana is a holder of British citizenship, just as many others based in the United Kingdom who form part of the ruling party’s active structures. The ruling party has representation in US, Australia, New Zealand and many other countries, if the issue is about being not able to campaign in the US and parts of Europe. Why not say there will be no diaspora vote in those countries which have applied sanctions on Zimbabwe? The few Zimbabweans living in China also deserve the opportunity to cast their votes for Members of Parliament, who will go into the newly-built Parliament? Other countries in Sadc and Africa allow their citizens to vote while domiciled in the diaspora. Interestingly, Mnangagwa was in China when the Rwandan President Paul Kagame cast his vote in the Asian giant when African leaders travelled there for the Forum on China Africa Co-operation (Focac). You may have noticed that Rwanda gives its citizens in the diaspora the right to vote. Why should Zimbabweans in the diaspora be barred from voting? What legacy will Mnangagwa leave behind if he is arm-twisted by the likes of Chinamasa, Zanu PF spokesperson Christopher Mutsvangwa, who enjoy holidays in countries that have imposed sanctions on Zimbabwe? If you are a listening President, you must listen to the voice of the diasporans who want to vote from their host countries just like many other African citizens based in the diaspora. How will the Zimbabweans trust a president who promises one thing, and is overruled by a mere political party? – Kennedy Kaitano