BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA
DYNAMOS will be hoping to pick themselves up and regroup when they host table toppers FC Platinum in a Castle Lager Premier Soccer League on Sunday. But in reality, they face arguably their biggest test so far this season. This is after the Harare football giants had their heart ripped out by a defeat to Cranborne Bullets in Rusape at the weekend. Dynamos also suffered a defeat to Yadah, while they were held to a draw by Triangle to pick just a single point from their last three matches. The loss of form has seen them drop to third position on the log table and eight points behind their next opponents, who are enjoying good form. With a new-look FC Platinum in top form, Dynamos coach Tonderai Ndiraya has to summon all his experience to provide a convincing case of his title credentials. The recent dip in form has seen a section of the team’s supporters calling for his expulsion. But he has had the backing of the club hierarchy in the face of adversity. Club chairperson Isiah Mupfurutsa told NewsDay Sport they were not panicking yet after the two defeats and were fully behind the coach. Mupfurutsa insists the situation is still under control and they have the firm belief that they can rise again and go on to stand at the winners podium at the end of the campaign. However, that is easier said than done as Mapeza has built a fresh squad looking hungrier than ever. While the FC Platinum gaffer insists he has not set out to win the league title this term as he seeks to build his squad in preparation for the next campaign, his lads have surprised even him with a polished performance that has thrust them at the top table of Zimbabwean football. Mapeza’s youthful squad has suffered just three defeats in the campaign this far and look unstoppable after they recently saw off Bulawayo Chiefs at the weekend which featured a host of former FC Platinum players: The Moyo brothers, Kelvin and Elvis and former striker Perfect Chikwende, among others. That this youthful squad managed to overcome their more experienced opponents is evidence enough that they have the capacity to win the coveted title. Mapeza usually focuses on phased build-up in his play and demands reactions when the team loses possession. He wants everyone to run. However, should Ndiraya manage to overcome FC Platinum, it will give more ground for optimism ahead of the remainder of the campaign. He is encouraged by the fact that the last time the two teams faced off at Mandava, they played to a 0-0 stalemate.