By Courage Nyaya
Harare City head coach Taurai Mangwiro is not pressing the panic button yet despite a poor run that has seen his team losing three games on the trot. As a result, the Sunshine City Boys are flirting with relegation, sitting 14th on the 18-team log with 18 points. Mangwiro said: “I want to assure the Harare City faithful that there is no need to panic, it’s not something that will send nerves into our camp. “It is at this point that we need each other the most and we will play our part to try and steer the team to safety and make sure we have a strong finish to the season. It is not going to be easy, but it can be done. So that’s the spirit approaching the remainder of the season.” He is confident that his team can go on a good run to breathe life into their ailing campaign. “I’m not panicking yet because I saw the team go on a six-match unbeaten run though it was predominantly drawing. I get a lot of encouragement from the fact that the games we lost we have been the dominant team so it’s not like we are far off the mark,” the Harare City mentor said. “The only challenge we are trying to address is to bring in two natural forward players that can bring in goals to improve the conversion rate.” He said his team needs to replace players that left during the current transfer window. “We have lost at least four players during this window, so we need to make sure we bring in replacements,” Mangwiro said. “So far (Tatenda) Tumba, has relocated to the United States to join his family there and three more who have indicated they would want to move on and will make an official comment once the deals materialise. As for now, we are working on bringing in a few youngsters to help boost our squad.” He said he had confidence in the players that he had at his disposal. Harare City’s next fixture is against a resurgent Yadah and Mangwiro expects a tough encounter. “We are up against the Yadah team bubbling with confidence. Having had a poor spell they have now won twice on the bounce and we would need to be at our best to salvage something out of that game,” he said. “Their situation should give us hope that it can be done because they were having a poor run and results were not coming their way, but they beat Dynamos and went on to beat ZPC Kariba in a difficult away match. So, we believe we can do even
better.”