By Nomalanga Kabanzi
MANYAME Leisure Park Centre proprietor, Nancy Mutsvairo launched Woman of Dignity Mambokadzi ndiwe at the weekend. The inaugural Mambokadzi ndiwe, which brings together women from southern Africa to share ideas and skills on ideal African homes and families under different regional cultures and traditions, was launched in Chitungwiza at a colourful ceremony emceed by former ZBC radio disc jockey Elizabeth Chengeta. “Mambokadzi ndiwe has given women from all walks of life a platform to meet, share ideas on how women can enhance or help in the development of the family, country and continent, the importance of nutrition to our health, the dynamics of the cultures by showcasing different African designs, traditional foods which has the First Lady Dr Amai Auxillia Mnangagwa’s thrust of prioritising the eating of traditional foods so that we have healthy families and nation,” Chengeta said. Participants came from Malawi, South Africa, Mozambique, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Masholand East Province secretary-general Christine Matizha, who is the founder of Miss Rural Heritage Zimbabwe and president of Multi-talented Youth Association was the guest of honour. In her speech, she urged women to support one another instead of pulling each other down. Women shared ideas on how to cook African food, for example, a lady from Musana shared how to cook muriwo wemumhodzi (pumpkin leaves), with suggestion from other women that when cooking this delicacy it is better to substitute soda with mealie-meal because soda is not good for people’s health. A South African woman shared different methods on how to cook madora (mopani worms) with peanut butter. She also shared a recipe for cooking mbeva (mice) and makurwe (crickets), saying these taste “excellent and much better than beef”. Another Zimbabwean, Laina Zengeya shared a recipe on how to prepare nhopi (mashed pumpkin). She said food should look attractive when set on the table, adding that women should not exclusively prepare synthetic foods, but a balanced diet. She also encouraged mothers to give their children African foods to protect them from diseases such as diabetes and blood pressure at an early age. Zengeni further advised mothers to have a garden to  grow vegetables, onions and  indigenous greens. The women participated in a modelling competition and the winners were Violet Mhute from South Africa in the above 50 age group category, Cecilia Masundie from Malawi in the 41 to 50 years age group, while Elizabeth Nyandoro won in the under 40 age  group. Estate administrator Sarah Javangwe promised to write wills for free for all the 50 women who participated in the modelling competition. An Air Force band called Air Power Band entertained guests.