BY FORTUNE MBELE BULAWAYO CHIEFS….(2)2 CAPS UNITED…………….. 0 TROUBLED Caps United suffered their fifth defeat on the trot, crashing to Bulawayo Chiefs in an exciting Castle Lager Premier Soccer League match at Luveve Stadium in Bulawayo yesterday. As early as the eighth minute, the Ninjas were ahead through Farau Matare, who took advantage of a defensive gaffe by Caps and fired past goalkeeper Tatenda Munditi. Chiefs maintained the pressure on the Green Machine from first whistle, but the visitors came back into the game and raised the tempo, with Phenias Bamusi a pain on the neck for defender Malvin Mkolo. Mkolo was cautioned by referee Busisani Chiwawa in the 12th minute for a crude tackle on Bamusi. Bamusi had a chance to equalise in the 25th minute, but his effort narrowly missed the upright, with Chiefs goalkeeper David Bizabani a beaten man. But Caps United’s rejuvenation was deflated by a cracker from outside the box by Ghanaian Wilson Mensah in the 27th minute which rendered Munditi a mere spectator. The Green Machine raised their game again towards the end of the first half, but would not get a goal. The second half did not produce any goals with the Ninjas holding on to the two goals scored in the first half. Caps got their fair share of chances, with Diego Makurumidze’s header going wide 10 minutes after the break while Rodwell Chinyengetere packed a shot in the 74th minute, but Bizabani was equal to the task with a spectacular save. The Ninjas assistant coach Thulani Sibanda, who was in charge in the absence of Nilton Terroso, who is away in Europe, was happy. “The boys played well. They showed a lot of determination. We did not change anything in terms of preparation and our philosophy. It is coach Nilton’s philosophy. We are climbing up the log. We are very optimistic. We will be among the best teams in the second half of the season,” Sibanda said. Lloyd Chitembwe of Caps United said: “Our start was a bit slow. Our second half was good and we never gave them space. We did not commit ourselves, especially in the first goal.” Chitembwe lauded Caps supporters who kept on cheering the team, even when it was losing, adding that they deserved better. Teams Bulawayo Chiefs: D Bizabani, E Moyo, W Mensah (B Nyahunzvi 60′), H Chikosa (B Vheremu 69′), L Ndlela, A Musiyiwa, M Mkolo, K Moyo, P Chikwende, F Moyo, F Matare (I Tarumbwa 80′) Dynamos: T Munditi, M Machazane, H Dzingai (I Nyoni 39′), K Bulaji, T Macheka, D Chafa, R Chinyengetere, D Makurumidze, P Bamusi, J Tulani, W Manondo