BY CHIEDZA MAZHANGARA
LAST Saturday night was indeed a night to remember after the “Wagwizi” chanter Jah Prayzah and South African rapper Casper Nyovest did justice to the show Kings concert at Wood and Pub Grill which was jammed by people from all walks of life. While the crowd was still waiting for the “kings” to arrive, revellers watched the Champions’ League match between Real Madrid and Liverpool. For the Real Madrid fans the happiness was doubled after their team scooped the cup. After the match, several DJs maintained the party mood as Jah Prayzah’s band prepared to enter the stage. The Kutonga kwaro hitmaker arrived on stage at exactly 0051hrs in a blue and white outfit. He was greeted by ear-splitting screams and whistles with fans jostling to get closer to the stage. Jah Prayzah wasted no time. He immediately set the whole house on fire with his Hakata, Donhodzo and Dzamutsana, among other hits. The energetic singer’s mbira playing prowess wowed the crowd which responded by clapping hands, singing along and dancing to the music. The afro contemporary king also took time to take fans down memory lane by playing one of his yesteryear hits Ngoda. As Jah Prayzah ended his performance with Gochi gochi, he saluted his fans thanking them for coming out in their numbers to support him. After he left, DJ Merciless kept the mood high by combining both local and international songs across genres. At exactly 0210hrs, the South African rapper made his grand appearance on stage with his Titomboweni. The interaction between the rapper and the crowd was indeed something else with him occasionally shouting “you guys are a great crowd”. Casper’s performance was sizzling. As he performed the song Friday night, he frequently shouted “do we have ladies in the house”, which was met by excited responses from the lady fans who screamed “Mufasa, Mufasa”, one of Casper’s affectionate names. To stoke the already sparking fire, Casper Nyovest belted the popular Asbonge which saw many hip-hop lovers singing along. However, as dawn approached, most people were visibly exhausted and no longer fit to last the distance. Many started trickling out of the venue while the rapper was still on stage.