BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA
DYNAMOS coach Tonderai Ndiraya has predicted that the Harare derby against Caps United at the National Sports Stadium at the weekend would be a reverting contest despite the poor form of the protagonists in recent weeks. The city rivals face off for the first time since 2019 at this level of the game on Sunday. However, the build up to the match has not generated so much hype as is usually the case when they meet because both giants are enduring a fallow period. Caps is enduring a dreadful run of five defeats on the trot while Dynamos have failed to win any of their last four matches. DeMbare have also failed to score in their last two matches. But Ndiraya, who admitted his side was dismal against Herentals at the weekend, reckons that those statistics will count for little because the stakes are high whenever these giants meet. “We have another week to prepare for the derby, a very difficult match. We have to improve ourselves, especially on the psychological side so that we get into that match very much prepared. It’s a very crucial match not just for Caps, but for us as well. There are bragging rights on the line,” Ndiraya said. He feels that despite recent setbacks, Caps would emerge stronger from their problems to fight for the badge. “You can’t underrate Caps, especially getting into the derby. They always harness all their energy, all their effort to make sure they get the result despite all what is happening in their camp. Rest assured you will see a different Caps next weekend. Rest assured that the match will be exciting. Hopefully, we can turn up in that game, so we have a whole week of preparing for that and hopefully we can push and get a result,’ Ndiraya said. Dynamos were rocked by internal problems last week which saw the club hierarchy suspend Ndiraya under unclear circumstances. He was only reinstated on Thursday but his return could not halt the team’s run of poor results as they were held to a 0-0 draw against Herentals. Caps, on the other hand, are still struggling to recover from the mental impact caused by the sacking of some senior players a month ago over allegations that they were involved in planning to boycott their league match against Cranborne Bullets.